KENSINGTON CHURCH OF ENGLAND DISTRICT VISITING SOCIETY (1846)***


Transcribed from the 1846 Geo. Nichols edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org.  Many thanks to the Royal Borough of Kensington
Libraries for allowing their copy to be used for this transcription.





                                  SECOND
                              ANNUAL REPORT
                                  OF THE
                                KENSINGTON
                            CHURCH OF ENGLAND
                                 DISTRICT
                            VISITING SOCIETY.


                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
         PRINTED BY GEO. NICHOLS, EARL’S COURT, LEICESTER SQUARE.
                            FEBRUARY 3, 1846.

                                * * * * *

***  _The Secretaries will be happy to give all the information in their
power to any Subscriber or Parishioner who may wish for it upon any point
not fully treated of in the Report of the Committee_.




KENSINGTON
CHURCH OF ENGLAND DISTRICT VISITING SOCIETY.


                                PRESIDENT,
                   THE VEN. ARCHDEACON SINCLAIR, VICAR.

                             VICE-PRESIDENTS,
       HON. W. S. S. LASCELLES, M.P.   SIR J. CONROY, BART. K.C.H.
                        SIR HENRY WILLOCK, K.L.S.

                                TREASURER,
                              MR. SHEPHARD.

                            JOINT SECRETARIES,
                     REV. C. A. STEVENS.  MR. CLARKE.
                           REV. T. R. BRANFOOT.

                                AUDITORS,
                       MR. WARNER.  DR. WADDILOVE.

                                COMMITTEE,

MR. F. PRATT BARLOW.     MR. GLOYNE.
MR. BELLWORTHY.          REV. J. H. HOWLETT.
MR. CHESTERTON.          MR. MERRIMAN.
MR. COOKE.               MR. J. N. MERRIMAN.
MR. COTTON.              MR. MOSS.
MR. GARRARD.             MR. WEIGALL.

                                COLLECTOR,
                   ALFRED ELLIS, 13, _Hornton Street_.




KENSINGTON
CHURCH OF ENGLAND DISTRICT VISITING SOCIETY.


_At the Second Annual Meeting of the Members and Friends of the above
Institution_, _held at the National School_, _on Tuesday the_ 3_rd of
February_, 1846,

              THE VENERABLE ARCHDEACON SINCLAIR, President,
                             _In the Chair_,

A Report of the Society’s proceedings during the year 1845 having been
read, it was proposed by SIR HENRY WILLOCK, seconded by the REV. J. H.
HOWLETT, and

_Resolved unanimously_—

I.  That the Report now read be approved by this Meeting, and that it be
printed and circulated under the direction of the Board of Management;
and that their recommendation respecting the Seventh General Rule be
carried into effect.

                                * * * * *

It was proposed by the REV. DR. HESSEY, seconded by MR. WEIGALL, and

_Resolved unanimously_—

II.  That the System of District Visiting through the intervention of the
Laity, based as it is upon the highest Christian principles, is a
function of the Church, the due exercise of which is full of promise of
the greatest advantage, both in things temporal and spiritual; and that
the results of the operations of this Society afford a most satisfactory
exemplification of the assertion.

                                * * * * *

It was proposed by DR. WADDILOVE, seconded by the REV. H. W. JERMYN, and

_Resolved unanimously_—

III.  That the establishment of Provident Funds, whose tendency is to
give a powerful impulse to the promotion of habits of providence,
frugality, and self-reliance, at the same time that they confer immediate
benefit on the poor, is a most important auxiliary to the operations of
this Society, and contributes in a high degree to the effecting of that
moral and religious improvement which is the great end and object of all
its endeavours.

                                * * * * *

It was moved by MR. MERRIMAN, seconded by MR. WARNER, and

_Carried unanimously_—

IV.  That the best thanks of the Society be given to the Treasurer, for
his constant regard to the advancement of the Society and its objects,
and for his valuable labours in the more immediate execution of the
office he holds; and that he be requested to continue his kind services.

                                * * * * *

It was moved by the REV. J. W. SHERINGHAM, seconded by MR. PICKERING, and

_Carried unanimously_—

V.  That the thanks of the Meeting be given to the Board of Management,
and the Auditors, for their careful attention to the objects of the
Society, in endeavouring to provide for the welfare of the poor; and that
they be respectively re-elected, with the substitution of the names of
MR. COOKE and MR. JAMES N. MERRIMAN in the room of those of the REV. H.
PENNY and MR. MURRAY, who have vacated the office of Members of the
Board.

                                * * * * *

It was moved by the REV. T. R. BRANFOOT, seconded by MR. MERRIMAN, and

_Carried unanimously_—

VI.  That the most cordial thanks of the Society and of the Parishioners,
are due to the Visitors for their valuable endeavours to ameliorate the
temporal and spiritual condition of the poor.

                                * * * * *

It was moved by the Rev. J. H. HOWLETT, seconded by Mr. HAY, and

_Carried unanimously_—

VII.  That the cordial thanks of this Meeting be offered to the
Secretaries, the REV. C. A. STEVENS and MR. CLARKE, for their most
efficient discharge of the important and laborious duties of their
office; and that they be re-elected; and that the REV. T. R. BRANFOOT be
elected joint Clerical Secretary.

                                * * * * *

It was moved by MR. SHEPHARD, seconded by the REV. DR. HESSEY, and

_Carried unanimously_—

VIII.  That the thanks of the Meeting be given to the Venerable the
President, for the interest he has evinced, and the superintendence he
has exerted, in the management of the operations of the Society; and also
for his kindness in presiding over the present Meeting, and his able and
obliging conduct in the Chair.

                                * * * * *

***  _Ladies or Gentlemen who may be desirous of taking charge of
Districts as Visitors_, _are requested to communicate with the
Secretaries_, _who_, _in the event of vacancies occurring_, _will inform
them thereof_.

***  _Forms used by the Society_, _will be supplied on application by_
MR. BIRCH, _High Street_.




GENERAL RULES.


1.  THIS Society shall be called the “KENSINGTON CHURCH OF ENGLAND
DISTRICT VISITING SOCIETY.”

2.  The object of the Society shall be to improve the temporal and
spiritual condition of the Poor of Kensington.

3.  A Fund for that purpose shall be raised by Subscriptions and
Donations; Subscriptions to be due on the first of January in each year.

4.  Annual Subscribers of not less than One Guinea shall be Members of
the Society.

5.  The business of the Society shall be conducted by a Board, consisting
a President, Vice-Presidents, a Treasurer, Secretary, and Committee of
Management.  The Vicar to be President, ex-officio; the Curates, Members
of the Committee; other twelve members to be elected at the yearly
general meeting of the Society.  A report of the proceedings of the Board
shall be presented annually at the General Meeting, and published for the
information of the Parishioners.

6.  The Board shall meet on the first Tuesday in every Month to audit
accounts submitted, and decide upon cases referred.  Three Members to
form a quorum.

7.  That the operations of this Society shall be extended over that
portion of Kensington which is in connection with the Clergy of St. Mary
Abbot’s Church.

8.  The Visitors shall all be Members of the Established Church; their
business shall be, to keep a List of all the families in their several
Districts, according to a prescribed form; to inquire into all cases
recommended; to administer relief; and to circulate Books and Tracts upon
the List of this Society.

9.  Relief shall not be given in any case by the Visitor to a larger
amount than 2s. a week for adults, and 1s. for each child, nor continued
for a longer period than four weeks, without the sanction of the Board,
at its monthly meeting.  The Board, however, shall not be subject to the
same restrictions.

10.  Relief shall be administered by orders on Shopkeepers chosen by the
Board, and not in money, except in extreme cases.

11.  No applicant of notoriously immoral character shall be relieved; but
relief shall not be refused to any person on account of his religious
persuasion.

12.  No person shall be relieved who has not resided three months in the
Parish, and has not occupied the same house or lodging, unless good
reason be assigned.

13.  Subscribers to the Society may recommend cases for inquiry and
relief.  Recommendations may be sent to the National School House, from
whence they will be forwarded daily to the Visitors.  Money remitted to
any of the Parochial Clergy for the relief of particular families shall
be appropriated to that purpose, if they are found to be proper objects
of charity; otherwise it shall be returned to the Donor, or, with his
consent, added to the general fund.

14.  Visitors will be expected to forward their Books for the
consideration of the Board the day before the monthly meeting, or they
may attend the meeting in person, or by substitute.

15.  A Parochial Lending Library shall be provided by the Board, together
with a supply of Books and Tracts, to be either given, lent, or sold, by
the Visitors.  No Book or Tract to be sold at a lower rate than
half-price.

16.  Cases of sickness shall always be reported by the Visitors to the
Parochial Clergy.

17.  The Board, at its monthly meeting, shall supply the Visitors with
funds proportioned to the probable wants of their several Districts.




SECOND ANNUAL REPORT.


The Committee of the District Visiting Society, in presenting the SECOND
ANNUAL REPORT of their proceedings, feel that they have every ground for
renewing the congratulations which they were last year able to offer to
the Society, on the advantages which have accrued to the parish through
its instrumentality, and also, on the prospects of continually increasing
benefits, as its plans become more fully matured, and its operations more
clearly developed and in consequence more completely effective.

Since the last Annual Meeting changes have taken place in the
ECCLESIASTICAL ARRANGEMENTS of the parish, which, having the effect of
removing the Northern Districts from the superintendence of the Clergy of
St. Mary Abbot’s, render necessary an alteration in the Seventh General
Rule of the Society.  The Committee accordingly recommend that the Rule
be now modified, so as to confine the future operations of the Society to
that portion of Kensington which is under the ecclesiastical charge of
the Vicar.  It is right to mention that arrangements made by the Clergy
of St. John’s and St. James’s are expected to provide for the requisite
attention being paid to the wants of the poor within their respective
localities.

Having now had two years’ EXPERIENCE of the DIFFICULTIES which must beset
every endeavour to produce a substantial and permanent improvement in the
condition of so extensive a mass of population, whose individual elements
are so unsettled and fugitive;—the Committee have had a fair opportunity
of judging of the practical working of the Rules that were originally
adopted, and of the plan and operations which has from the first outset
been acted upon.  The result, they are prepared to say, amply justifies
the discretion by which those Rules and that plan were dictated.  It is a
sufficient confirmation of the opinion they hold, that throughout the
whole of the Metropolitan portion of the Diocese the same general system
of District Visiting, the same active co-operation of Laity with Clergy
in the work of charity, and the same general course of action, have been
acknowledged as the only effectual means of coping successfully with the
pressing evils arising from an overflowing population, from ignorance,
improvidence, and vice; and that, under the sanction and direction of the
Bishop, they have been almost universally brought into action. {10}

There is one point bearing strongly upon the difficulties the Committee
have had to encounter, to which they are desirous of directing especial
attention; namely, how much the endeavours of the Society to ameliorate
the condition of the poor would be facilitated, if greater care were
taken by the donors of charity to make full inquiry into the CHARACTER
and CIRCUMSTANCES of APPLICANTS, before administering relief.

It is found that applicants at the doors of residents belong in general
to one of three classes:—

The first class consists of PERMANENT MENDICANTS; who have a more or less
constant residence in this or other parishes, and are supported
exclusively by the donations of charitably disposed, but
undiscriminating, individuals.  Instances can be pointed out, of persons
who it is believed have lived in Kensington for years, professing for the
most part to have some nominal occupation, yet in fact subsisting
entirely upon means obtained by such systematic mendicancy.  As they
readily state their trade and abode when interrogated, their tale—which
is but too commonly a tissue of mere invention, or at best only partially
correct—is at once assumed to be true.  In the event of further inquiry
being instituted at their abode, the same story of course is told; and
probably supported by the interested evidence of the other dwellers in
the same house, who generally derive their subsistence by similar means.
Relief is given; the idle and the impostor encouraged; and by so much the
industrious and respectable labourer discouraged and injured, the
suffering and the unfortunate deprived of their due.

The second class is that of VAGRANTS, or TRAMPERS.  These have no settled
home, {11a} but sleeping at the nightly lodging houses, at some of the
various Refuges in London or elsewhere, or in the vagrant-ward at the
workhouses, wander about from parish to parish and from town to town
continually; frequenting the various watering-places in their respective
seasons, and succeeding ordinarily in reaping a rich harvest from the
ready liberality of visitants.  The tale that is now most commonly and
most effectually pleaded by them is that of distress from want of work.
But though unquestionably there are cases of this description, it is yet
certain that whatever their assertions, a small proportion only of such
applicants are willing to work, even if the opportunity be offered them.
{11b}

To those wanderers, whose cases are really those of sickness or urgent
destitution, the humane consideration of the Board of Guardians of this
parish has provided that every care and attention shall be paid
immediately upon proper application being made to the Master of the
work-house.

The third class, which may be designated as that of OCCASIONAL
MENDICANTS, is composed of persons included in the permanent population
of the parish; who, having always been accustomed to rely for their chief
or sole support during the winter upon the bounty they can obtain by
begging at the houses of benevolent individuals, are not, while still
encouraged to do so, to be diverted by any exertions of the Society from
a course which experience has proved to be so profitable.  They feel, for
the most part, a very natural aversion from any system of discriminating
charity.  They have, they appear to think, a kind of prescriptive right
to an equal portion with their neighbours of all relief administered,
irrespectively of their own moral or social character, and of their
circumstances and wants as compared with those of others.  They are
urgent in their importunity to the Visitor, and instead of being thankful
for what assistance he has it in his power to afford them with justice to
more deserving and pressing cases, become loud in their murmurings and
expressions of anger; and in some instances have gone so far, after
insulting conduct to the Visitor, as to carry their complaints to various
residents, who, unaware of the true facts, have perhaps been led by their
statement to form very erroneous and unjust opinions of the working of
the Society. {12}  The Committee, with accounts of the whole expenditure
of the Visitors, and the particular circumstances of the various cases
before them, together with many independent sources of information
respecting the character and habits of such applicants, have it in their
power to bear most ample testimony to the discretion and discrimination
with which the funds at their disposal have been administered.  And they
confidently call upon the subscribers and the parishioners generally, to
support the Visitors in their arduous, and too often thankless, labours;
and to second them in their endeavours to bring about a permanent
amelioration in the condition of the deserving poor.

That a great and remarkable diminution has taken place in the number of
applicants of this class at the houses of the residents since the
institution of this Society, is felt and confessed in almost all
quarters.  And if in any instances it has appeared, or has been thought,
that no such diminution has occurred, the Committee, from documents
before them, cannot help being satisfied that the cause and the remedy of
the evil lie equally in the hands of those who suffer from such
applications.  So long as relief is given at the doors without full
inquiry, so long will persons of this class be found to ask for it: so
long as bounties are conferred without respect to character and
circumstances, so long will mendicants be encouraged to exist in the same
state of debased and dependent pauperism. {13}

It is evident that one of the first objects to be sought, both in respect
of time and importance, is to FIX and SETTLE the population. {14}  The
means and measures which immediately present themselves are those whose
tendency is, on the one hand, to encourage and assist the laborious,
deserving, and permanent portion of it: and, on the other hand, to
initiate, and stimulate the growth of providence and industry in those
who have not yet learned the necessity and the duty of striving to help
themselves and to improve their own condition; and at the same time to
check the migratory and mendicant habits of that class of persons, the
term of whose residence in any one place usually depends exclusively upon
the limits of the indiscriminate benevolence of charitable individuals in
the neighbourhood.  Such measures are those which the Committee have
taken; and in endeavouring by their means to attain the end desired, they
trust they shall in future receive the full co-operation of those
parishioners who, with every desire of doing good to the utmost of their
power, yet may have sometimes been unawares throwing away valuable
resources upon unworthy objects; upon persons, at all events, whose cases
are not THE MOST deserving cases of industry, respectability, sickness,
and distress.

These, then, are the classes of persons of whom it may be safely affirmed
that a very large majority of the APPLICANTS FOR RELIEF AT THE HOUSES of
the residents is composed.  And this statement will, the Committee hope,
exhibit the strong necessity of discriminating inquiry being made
previously to relief being afforded, not only in order to avoid giving
encouragement to such persons, but also in justice to the really
deserving poor, in order that they (whose cases are for the most part
known only to the District Visitors and the Clergy) may receive that
assistance and relief which all will confess to be their due, and every
one desire that they should obtain.

Most earnestly do the Committee appeal to the Members of this Society and
the parishioners in general, to consider the importance—the Christian
duty—of administering the proportion of their income which they set apart
for charitable purposes, in such a manner as may produce THE GREATEST
amount of good.  That duty clearly is, not only to “distribute,” but to
“distribute to the _necessity_” of their brethren.  To perform this
effectually, a knowledge of that necessity, as it really exists, must be
acquired: which implies an intimate acquaintance with the habits and
circumstances of families, and with their various grades of desert and of
distress.  This, again, can only be attained by a watchful
superintendence, exercised for a length of time over them by the same
persons—as by a permanent Visitor, or the Clergy.  Of these, then, let
inquiry be made respecting such applicants; they will be at once willing
to state whether, in their opinion, they are or are not fit objects of
relief and encouragement.  To these, who possess the most certain means
of information that are attainable, let any, {15} who are desirous of
affording assistance beyond a mere annual subscription, apply.  They will
recommend to their notice, not the most importunate and clamorous, but
the most necessitous and the most deserving.  They will point out as fit
recipients of encouragement not the professed beggar, nor the impostor,
nor the vagrant, nor the idle, nor the improvident, nor the drunkard, nor
the irreligious; but those, who are aged, or infirm, or sick, or “maimed,
or halt, or blind;” those, who are honestly and diligently striving, with
perhaps but a single downward step {16} between them and pauperism, to
maintain their position as respectable and profitable members of society;
those, who are anxiously endeavouring to avail themselves to the utmost
of their spiritual privileges and advantages, in order to fulfil their
duty in their several relations of life, to God, their neighbour, and
themselves.

The Committee turn with pleasure to the notice of the BENEFITS which have
been permitted to flow from the exertions of the Society.  And here they
naturally begin by adverting to that IMPROVEMENT in the TEMPORAL
CONDITION of the poor, which all experience proves to be an indispensable
preparation for the higher and more important advantages.  For it is
almost universally found that, below a certain point, the moral and
intellectual are absolutely concurrent with, and vary as, the physical
wants of a population.  The miserable effects of too long continued toil
and exertion without adequate repose and nutrition, with insufficient
clothing, exposure to cold, damp, and deficient ventilation, and other
privations to which the poor are too often subjected, invariably extend
their influence over their social condition and habits, and affect
materially their position as moral and intelligent beings; bearing
powerfully upon matters with which at first sight they might appear to
have little connexion. {17a}

The anticipation expressed last year of an increased appreciation of the
PROVIDENT FUNDS by the poor, has been more than justified.  The number of
depositors to the COAL FUND, which in 1844 was 388, in 1845 has been 581.
The sum deposited in 1844 was £160; in 1845 it amounted to not less than
£263.  In the St. Mary Abbot’s division the amount of deposits has
actually been doubled.  The total value of coals dispensed has been £320,
instead of £200 as in 1844.  The most remarkable increase is in the
districts of Jennings’ Buildings, among the Irish; of whom, in 1844, 14
depositors laid by £6; in 1845, 68 have deposited £33.  In another
district, in Charles Place, the number of depositors has increased from 3
to 17.  In Campden Place 73 out of 125 families, and in Southend 36 out
of 50 received coals at Christmas, averaging in quantity from three to
four sacks each:—the fruits of their own industry and providence. {17b}

CLOTHING FUNDS have been established in eleven districts.  The number of
depositors has been 100; and the amount distributed in articles of
clothing to them, £33.  It is confidently hoped that a considerable
increase in the number of Subscribers and in the amount of Subscriptions
to the District Visiting Society may enable the Committee to establish a
general measure; which for want of sufficient funds has been hitherto of
necessity postponed.

The above facts speak for themselves.  That in the second year of its
establishment upwards of ONE-THIRD of the whole poor population—and
consequently a much larger proportion of the permanent and industrious
part—should have been persuaded and encouraged and enabled, by the means
of this Society, to lay up for themselves a winter provision of what is
so essential to the comfort and health of their families, would
demonstrate at once, even were this the only point of attention, and
these the sole benefits caused to the parish, that neither have the
Visitors been inactive, nor their exertions and the plans of the Society
unproductive of valuable results.  If these facts proved nothing more,
they would at least prove this, that the respectable and industrious poor
are willing and anxious to help themselves if encouraged to do so; that,
unless when their ignorance has been insidiously imposed upon, they are
desirous of considering the rich as their friends, and indeed look to
them to give that encouragement, and that, if it be given, they will
return the fullest and most desirable reward to their benefactors, by
proving that their help has been of real benefit to them, not only in
their outward circumstances, but also in their improved moral and
intellectual tone of feeling and habit of life.  These facts give an
earnest that each succeeding year will continue to add materially to the
efficiency of the Society, and to the amount of good produced through its
means.  The most difficult and most important step is secured; the
CONFIDENCE OF THE POOR in the Visitors and in the Society. {19}  And thus
a foundation is established for a superstructure of operations, the fruit
of which, under the Divine blessing, will assuredly be that of
continually increasing advantage, temporal, moral, and spiritual; and
whose effects will be found in the present and future happiness of both
him that giveth and him that receiveth—of both Visited and Visitor.

Other POINTS OF CONGRATULATION which last year offered themselves to the
Committee have this year not less of prominence.

The large number of BAPTISMS which was then exhibited, 100 above the
ordinary average, has been in 1845 scarcely diminished.  It is believed
that very few above the age of mere infancy now remain who have not been
baptized.

The TRIENNIAL CONFIRMATION which will in the present year (on the 9th of
June) be held in Kensington Church will, there is good ground for
believing, be attended by a large number of persons who through the
exertions of the Visitors and the Clergy have been brought to feel an
anxious desire to avail themselves of this sacred rite.

Few points of attention are of more importance than that of obtaining
SITUATIONS or EMPLOYMENT by the Visitors for the poor in their respective
districts.  Whether they regard the removal of young persons from vicious
associations to positions in private families where they may have not
only the advantage of advice and direction in the duties of life, but
also the forcible influence of moral and religious example; or whether
they consider the benefit derived from providing openings of honest
livelihood {20a} for those who perhaps have long been struggling against
bitter distress and consequent urgent temptation; the Committee feel that
it is impossible to overrate the importance of the subject.  The
instances which have been reported tend strongly to confirm their
estimation of it, at the same time that they demonstrate the value of the
assistance given by the Visitors in this respect. {20b}

The opening of a new NATIONAL SCHOOL for boys in the Gravel Pits will, it
is hoped, have the effect of reducing the excessive pressure on the Town
Schools; the fulness of which has hitherto placed a considerable
difficulty in the way of the exertions of the Visitors and Clergy.

A somewhat similar difficulty has prevailed with respect to the
inadequate extent of ACCOMMODATION at Kensington CHURCH as compared with
the population.  It is not easy or satisfactory to impress upon the poor
the duty of public worship, except in the anticipation of a more
proportionate amount of accommodation being before long provided.

The Visitors have been during the two years instrumental in circulating
upwards of 2000 TRACTS: and the Committee have the greatest satisfaction
in reporting that there is reason to know that of those families who are
in a position to avail themselves of the use of the Holy Scriptures and
of the Liturgy of the Church of England, very few are unprovided with
both Bible and Prayer book. {21}

In order to afford means of enabling the Visitors to carry out more
satisfactorily their endeavours to raise and improve the condition of the
poor parishioners, a LOAN LIBRARY has been just established, in
compliance with the fifteenth rule of the Society.  But it being
necessary to reserve a certain sum in hand to meet extraordinary calls
upon the Treasurer, it has been found impossible to appropriate more than
a very small and inadequate portion of the funds to this purpose.  The
Library has in consequence only been brought into action over a very
limited number of districts.  The Committee trust that this
representation will produce a very considerable increase of DONATIONS for
the ensuing year, so as to enable them to bring so valuable and important
an institution to bear upon the whole parish.

In dosing their Report, the Committee are anxious to express their
cordial THANKS to those MEDICAL GENTLEMEN whose attendance and advice at
the Dispensary and attention to the wants of the poor at their homes, are
productive of so much important benefit to them.  It is impossible to
speak too strongly of the advantage derived to the parish by their
arduous and exemplary labours; which, though gratefully appreciated and
acknowledged by the immediate recipients of the benefit, are perhaps not
sufficiently, as they cannot be too well, known to the body of the
parishioners.

And they desire to express most warmly the sense they have of the
assiduous and successful exertions of the LADIES and GENTLEMEN who have
taken the initiative in the work of charity as VISITORS of the poor. {22}
Under discouragements and annoyances of no trifling description—against
coldness and suspicion—in spite of fraud and imposture—they have yet
persevered in the exercise of their privilege as members of the Church,
in following the example of Its Divine Head, who “went about doing good.”
The Committee trust that as these labours, and the operations of the
Society in general, become year by year more effective, and their results
more fully ripened, there will be found to have sprung up a more intimate
connexion among the different classes of the community: one which,
founded on an interchange of beneficence on the one hand and gratitude on
the other, and supported and cemented on both by Christian sympathy and
love, cannot fail in being productive of important advantages to the
welfare of all concerned.  If it be the ordinary duty of the Committee,
while administering the funds at their disposal, to adopt such measures
as shall enable the poorer classes to perceive and fulfil what is due
from them in this interchange; it is _now_ their office to point out to
the wealthier and educated classes, who may be anxious for the
opportunity, how they may perform their part.

A blessing is promised in Scripture upon HIM THAT CONSIDERETH THE POOR.
It is hoped, that every member of the Church who enjoys wealth, or even
competence, will ‘consider’ conscientiously in what manner his exertions
for the relief of indigence and the advancement of religious improvement
may be most judiciously directed; what talents he possesses, not only of
property, but of time, and influence, and connexion; and in what way
those talents may be most beneficially and effectually applied. {23}  It
is hoped, that the necessary relation of Christian principles to active
charity will, from year to year, be more generally and more practically
acknowledged: that every one will learn to feel that for practice as well
as principle of Christian love he is absolutely accountable: that it is
therefore imperative upon him for the benefit of others, and at the same
time pre-eminently for his own, to take a lively personal interest in
concurrence and co-operation with the Clergy, in endeavouring to secure
the temporal, moral, social, and spiritual welfare of those who from
their position in rank and in neighbourhood are in a measure committed to
his charge and care.

The Committee can scarcely be wrong in entertaining the belief, that were
this personal co-operation effectually carried out, there would result,
under the blessing of God, a far nearer approximation than now exists, to
what every CHRISTIAN must anxiously and from his heart desire—UNITY IN
CHURCH AND NATION “IN ONE HOLY BOND OF TRUTH AND PEACE, OF FAITH AND
CHARITY.”



TREASURER’S REPORT.


The TREASURER, in presenting to the Donors and Subscribers the BALANCE
SHEET for the past year, begs to call attention to the decrease in the
number of both Donors and Subscribers.  Although it was not to be
anticipated that the former would be kept up to the same extent as in the
first year of the establishment of the Society, when a large outlay was
to be met, it was not unreasonable to expect, that both the number of the
Subscribers, and the aggregate amount of their subscriptions, would have
considerably increased as the operations of the Society, and the great
benefits resulting therefrom, were more generally known.  It is earnestly
hoped that when the foregoing Report has been circulated through the
parish, and the large amount of good that has been effected through the
agency of the Society has been thereby brought under the notice of the
inhabitants, its claims on public liberality will be better appreciated;
and that no one who is blessed with the means will hesitate to contribute
of his abundance, so as to enable the Society to carry out all those
beneficial measures intended for the amelioration of the temporal and
spiritual condition of his poorer and less favoured brethren, which were
proposed at the formation of the Society, but from which it has been
hitherto most reluctantly withheld by want of the requisite funds.

The Treasurer also begs to express his regret at the small amount
collected in the ALMS BOXES at the Parish Church, in comparison with the
number who attend the several services; it is gratifying, however, to
observe that in one or two instances a larger amount has been deposited
as a THANK OFFERING—examples which, it is hoped, may be frequently
followed by those who have experienced any special blessings.

The Treasurer wishes it to be distinctly understood that he would
thankfully receive DONATIONS or SUBSCRIPTIONS of however small an amount,
as it is the wish of the Society to afford an opportunity to ALL CLASSES
to assist, as far as their circumstances will permit, and each according
to his power, in the furtherance of the great work of practical Christian
charity.

_The Treasurer in Account with the Kensington District Visiting Society_.


SUBSCRIPTION ACCOUNT.

1845.                         £     s.     d.       £      s.     d.
Subscriptions                                        377     13      0
Deposits in Alms Boxes:—
     For January                1     17      4
     February                   2      7      3
     March                      3      1      9
     April                      1     13      6
     May (including             9     17      3
     Whitsunday)
     June                       1      8      7
     July (including a          6      0      9
     Thank Offering on the
     recovery of a Child)
     August                     1     15      3
     September                  5     12      7
     October                    1     17      1
     November                   1     16      0
     December                   2      7      4
                                                      39     14      8
The Vicar’s proportion of Collection at Church         4     15      2
Door, on Christmas Day
Produce of Sale of Bibles and Prayer Books             3     15      6
Deposits received from 636 Depositors                267      8      1
Interest on Deposits in Savings’ Bank                  2     14      9
Balance in hand on last Coal Account                          5      0
Interest on amount in Savings’ Bank                    2     17      0
Cash from Donation Fund, to meet DEFICIENCY           35      5      4
                                                    £734      8      6

                                * * * * *

1845.                         £     s.     d.       £      s.     d.
District Grants for            43      9      0
January
     February                  33      6      0
     March                     48     19      0
     April                     44     19      0
     May                       28      2      0
     June                       8     15      0
     July, August, Sept.,      28      6      0
     October
     November                  47     11      0
     December                  22      5      0
                                                     304     19      0
Paid Mr. Stanham for 121 tons 11½ cwt. of            170      4      2
Coals, delivered at 28s.
Ditto Mr. Neate for 93 tons 3 cwt. at 28s.           130      9      4
Ditto Mr. Bailey for 11 tons 14 cwt. at 28s.          16      7      7
Returned to 55 Depositors having left the              8      0      8
parish, or having subscribed less than the
value of 1 cwt.
Expenses:—
     Books, Printing,          46      0      1
     Stationery, &c.
     Collector                 25     19      0
     Sundries, including       14     19      2
     use of Board Room,
     &c.
     On Coal Fund Account       6      4      0
     Receivers of              11      5      6
     Deposits on Coal
     acc.
                                                     104      7      9
                                                    £734      8      6

                                                 JOHN SHEPHARD, TREASURER,
                              ALFRED WADDILOVE / GEORGE WARNER } AUDITORS.

                          9th February, 1846.  Examined and found correct.



DONATION ACCOUNT.

1845.                                  £      s.     d.
Balance in hand from last Account        94      6      7
Donations                                41      6      1
                                       £135     12      8

                                * * * * *

1845.                                               £      s.     d.
Purchase of Books for a Loan Library                  15      0      0
Cash to Subscription Account to meet                  35      5      4
DEFICIENCY
Balance in hand                                       85      7      4
                                                    £135     12      8

                                                 JOHN SHEPHARD, TREASURER.

                              ALFRED WADDILOVE / GEORGE WARNER } AUDITORS.

                          9th February, 1846.  Examined and found correct.




ALPHABETICAL LIST OF STREETS, &c.,
INCLUDED IN THE DISTRICTS OF THE
KENSINGTON DISTRICT VISITING SOCIETY.


***  _Members recommending any case for inquiry_, _are requested to state
exactly the residence of the applicant_, _and the No. of the District
from the following list_.

***  _Communications respecting persons resident in Streets_, _&c._, _not
in this list_, _should be made to the Clergy of the respective portions
of Kensington or Notting Hill_.

                                                  No. of the District.
Adam and Eve Cottages, High Street                                  25
Adam and Eve Yard, High Street                                      25
Albert Square, Southend                                             17
Annis Place, Duke’s Lane                                            26

Ball’s Court, High Street                                           19
Barlow’s Cottages, Kensington Square                                17
Bird’s Cottages, Duke’s Lane                                        26
Bird’s Cottages, Jennings’ Buildings                                 4
Brown’s Buildings, High Street                                       4
Bullingham Place                                                    26

Campden Street, 1–10                                                32
Campden Street, 11–end                                              33
Chancellor’s Yard                                                   25
Charles Place                                                       15
Charles Street                                                      12
Charles Street (Little)                                             15
Charles Street Cottages                                             15
Church Court, No. 2, 7, 9, 10 and Galleries                         22
Church Court, No. 3, 4, 6, 8, 12                                    23
Church Lane                                                         27
Church Street                                                       27
Claremont Cottages                                                  35
Cooke’s Lane                                                        16
Cousins’ Cottages                                                   36

Dark’s Cottages                                                      4
Duckmanton Court                                                    20
Duckmanton Yard                                                     11
Duke’s Lane                                                         26
Dulwich Court                                                       26

Edge Place                                                          36

Gardener’s Buildings                                                20
Gore Lane, West side, 1–20                                           1
Gore Lane, West side, 21–34                                          2
Gore Lane, West side, 35–47.  East side                              3

Haines’ Buildings                                                   17
Holland Place                                                       27
Holland Street                                                      28
Hornton Mews                                                        24
Hughes’ Cottages                                                    19

Ivy Cottages, Gore Lane                                              4

James Street, North side, No. 1–4.  East                            12
side, 1–2
James Street, East side, No. 3–10.  West                             9
side, 4–10
James Street, No. 11–20                                             14
James Street, West side, No. 11–14, 21–24                           13
James Street Mews                                                   12
Jennings’ Buildings, &c.  No. 1–23, 37–63                            4
Jennings’ Buildings, &c.  No. 24–36                                  5

Kensington Place                                                     4
King Street, West side, No. 1–4                                     17
King Street, West side, No. 5–15, 1                                 18
King Street, East side, No. 16–24                                   19
Knibbs’ Cottages                                                    25

Market Court                                                        21

New Court, Jennings’ Buildings                                       4
Newland Street, East side                                           25

Palace Place, No. 8–14                                               7
Palace Place (remainder)                                             8
Peel Street, North side, No. 1–25                                   29
Peel Street, South side, No. 1–10, 71–75                            31
Peel Street, South side, No. 11–14, 21–29,                          30
34–51
Phillimore Mews                                                     24
Playhouse Yard                                                       4
Pratt’s Cottages, Jennings’ Buildings                                4

Reservoir Cottages                                                  36
Russell’s Gardens                                                   10

Sharp’s Cottages, Jennings’ Buildings                                4
Shephard’s Gardens                                                  10
Somerset Yard                                                       25
Southend                                                            16

Tavern Yard                                                          4
Thomas Place                                                         4
Trafalgar Place                                                     16

Wiple Place                                                         27

Young Street                                                        11

LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS AND DONORS,
_Corrected to December_ 31_st_, 1845.


*** _It is particularly requested that any error in the following list
may be notified to the Treasurer or Secretaries_.

*** _Subscriptions and Donations may be paid either to the Treasurer_,
_Secretaries_, _or Collector_.

_Subscriptions may be given in favour of any particular District_, _if
desired_.

                           Donations.              Subscriptions.
                     £        _s._      _d._       £    _s._   _d._
HER MAJESTY THE                                     10     10      0
QUEEN
H. R. H. THE                                        10      0      0
DUCHESS OF KENT
H. R. H. THE                                         5      0      0
PRINCESS SOPHIA
The Venerable                                        5      0      0
Archdeacon
Sinclair, Vicar
and President

Abercrombie,                                         3      3      0
Mr., 25,
Kensington
square
Alton, Mr.,                                          1      0      0
Palace gate
Alexander, Mr.,                                      5      0      0
15, Notting
hill square
Alexander,                                           1      1      0
Miss, 26,
Hornton street
Alston, Mr., 5,                                      1      1      0
High row
Anonymous                8         0          0
Armstrong,                                           1      1      0
Mrs., 13,
Earl’s terrace
Auldjo, Mrs. T.                                      2      2      0
R., Noel House

Bailey, Mr. C, 45,                                   1      1      0
High street
Bailey, Mr. W., 4,            1         1     0
Newland Terrace
Barlow, Colonel, 8,                                  2      2      0
Leonard place
Barlow, Mr. F. P.,                                   2      2      0
24, Kensington
square
Barlow, Mrs. F. P.,                                  2      2      0
ditto
Barlow, Mr. James                                    2      2      0
P., Hyde park gate
Des Barres, Misses,                                  1      1      1
19, Upper Phillimore
place
Barrow, Mr.,                                         1      1      0
Kensington palace
Barrow, Mrs., ditto                                  1      1      0
Bayford, DR.,                          10     0
D.C.L., 1, Hornton
villas
Bayford, Mrs., 6,                                    1      1      0
Upper Hornton villas
Baynes, Mrs., 7,                                     1      0      0
Lower Notting hill
terrace
Beachcroft, Mrs.,                                    1      1      0
17, Notting hill
square
Beachcroft, Mr. C.,                                  1      1      0
High street, Notting
hill
Beetham, Mrs., 7,                                    1      0      0
Edwardes’ square
Bell, Mrs., 15,                                      2      2      0
Kensington square
Bell, Miss, 27,                                      1      1      0
Hornton street
Bellworthy, Mr.,                                     1      1      0
Newland place
Bennington, Mr., 2,                                  1      1      0
Marlborough terrace
Bentley, Mrs., 11,                                         10      0
Holland street
Berry, Miss, 39,                                     1      1      0
Kensington square
Biggar, Mr. J., 3,                                   2      2      0
Allen terrace
Biggar, Mrs., ditto                                  2      2      0
Birch, Mr. W., 5,                                    1      1      0
Terrace
Bird, Mr. S.,                                        2      2      0
Hornton villa
Bliss, Mrs., 4,                                      2      2      0
Addison road
Bowdler, Mrs. C.,                                          10      0
Grove terrace,
Notting hill
Boynton, Mrs., 12,                                   1      0      0
Gloucester terrace
Brabant, Mr., 12,             1         1     0
Ladbroke terrace
Breeze, Mr., 19,                                     1      0      0
High street
Brewer, Mr., 10,                                           10      0
High row
Bruce, Dr., 29,                                      1      1      0
Lower
Phillimore-place
Buckley, Miss, 5,                                    2      2      0
Orme square
Buckley, Mr. T. W.,                                  2      2      0
ditto
Buckmaster, Mrs.,                                    2      2      0
16, Holland street
Burnell, Rev. S.                                     1      1      0
Burt, Mrs., 10,                                      1      0      0
Lansdowne terrace
Butlin, Mrs., Ealing                                 2      2      0

Conroy, Sir John,                                    5      0      0
Bart. (V.P.),
Vicarage place
Conroy, Lady, ditto                                  1      0      0
Callcott, Mr. W. H.,                                 1      1      0
The Mall
Callcott, Miss, The                                  1      1      0
Mall
Callcott, Miss A.,                                   1      1      0
ditto
Camden, Mrs., 5,                                           10      0
Allen terrace
Casamajor, Mrs. R.,                                  1      1      0
13, Hornton street
Chalmers, Mrs.                                       1      1      0
Chesterton, Mr., 14,                                 1      0      0
Young street
Chisholm, Mr., 30,                                   1      1      0
Bedford place
Clarke, Mr., 17,                                     3      0      0
Kensington square
Close, Mr. J. D., 1,                                 1      1      0
Bedford place
Codd, Mrs. Harrison,                                       10      0
10, Campden hill
villas
Codd, Miss, ditto                                          10      0
Cole, Mr. H., 24,                                    1      1      0
Notting hill square
Collyhole, Mrs., 14,                                        5      0
Young street
Compton, Miss, 20,                      5     0
Lower Phillimore
place
Cooke, Mrs., 12,                                     1      1      0
Scarsdale terrace
Coombe, Mr., 5,                                      1      0      0
Upper Phillimore
place
Cope, Mr. C. W., 9,                                  2      2      0
Hyde park gate,
south
Corder, Mrs., 32,                                    1      1      0
High street
Cornell, Mr., 1,                                     1      1      0
Canning place
Cotton, Mr., 10,                                     2      2      0
Kensington square
Cowper, Mr., 6,               1         0     0
Campden hill villas
Crane, Mrs. and                                      1      1      0
Miss, 16, Scarsdale
terrace
Crosse, Miss, The                                    3      0      0
Terrace

Deane, Mrs., 24,                                     1      1      0
Lower Phillimore
place
Disbrowe, Miss,                                      2      2      0
Kensington palace
Downing, Mr., 4,                                     1      0      0
Lower Phillimore
place
Drake, Mr. J.,                                       1      1      0
Ladbroke road
Durant,                                              1      1      0
Major-General, Hyde
park gate

Elliott, Mrs., 26,                                          5      0
Notting hill terrace
Escombe, Mr., 6,                                     1      1      0
Boyne terrace

Farrance, Miss, 26,                                  1      1      0
Lower Phillimore
place
Finch, Mr., 3,                                       1      1      0
Madeley villas
Forbes, Mr. J., 4,                                   1      0      0
Allen terrace
Forbes, Mrs. J.,                                     1      0      0
ditto
Forbes, Mrs. R.,                                     1      1      0
Hyde park gate south
Forbes, Mrs. and                                     1      0      0
Miss, 2, ditto
Forbes, Capt. C., 1,                                 1      1      0
ditto
Fortune, Miss, 2,                                           5      0
Bedford place
Freem, Miss, 23,                                            5      0
High street
Frost, Dr., 5,                                             10      6
Ladbroke grove

Garrard, Mr., 18,                                    5      0      0
Notting hill square
Gee, Mrs. John, 5,                                   1      1      0
Victoria road
George, Mr., 4,                                      1      1      0
Hornton villas
Gloyne, Mr., 5,                                      1      1      0
Terrace
Godfrey, Mr., 3,                                           10      6
Somerset terrace
Good, Mr., Palace                                    3      0      0
Green
Gorham, Mr., 5, High                                        5      0
street
Goss, Miss, Vicarage                                 2      2      0
place
Gower, Mr., Norland                     2     6
Nursery
Green, Miss, 17,                                     1      1      0
Hornton street
Griffiths, Miss, 9,           1         0     0
Church street

Hopetoun, Countess                                   1      1      0
of, Niddry lodge
Haines, Mr. John,                                          10      0
High street
Hardenberg, Miss, 9,                                        5      0
Norland terrace
Hardman, Mrs., 30,                                         10      0
Upper Phillimore
place
Hardwick, Dr., 28,                                   1      1      0
Lower Phillimore
place
Harper, Mr., 21,                                     2      2      0
Kensington square
Harper, Mrs., ditto                                  1      1      0
Harrison, Mr., 3,                                    2      2      0
St. George’s terrace
Harrison, Miss,                                             5      0
ditto
Harrison, Miss                                             26
Eliza, ditto
Harvey, Mrs., High            1         0     0
street, Notting hill
Hay, Mr., 1, Terrace                                 2      2      0
Haynes, Mrs., 2,                                     1      0      0
Norland square
Heale, Mrs., 14,                                     2      2      0
Notting hill terrace
Hepburn, Mrs., 7,             1         0     0             5      0
Allen terrace
Hessey, Rev. Dr.,                                    1      1      0
27, Kensington
square
Heward, Mrs., 5,                                     1      1      0
Young street
Higgins, Mrs., 2,                                          10      0
Newland terrace
Hinchcliffe, Mr., 1,                                 l      1      0
Notting hill terrace
Holmes, Miss,                                              14      0
Wright’s lane
Horsley, Mr. and                                     2      0      0
Family, 1, High row
Howlett, Rev. J. H.,                                 2      2      0
9, Young street
Hughes, Mr. W. H.,                                   1      1      0
50, High street
Hume, Miss Emily, 3,                                        2      6
St. George’s terrace
Hunter, Major, 14,                                   1      0      0
Albert place
Hutchins, Mrs., 19,                                  1      1      0
St. Mary Abbot’s
terrace

Irby, Hon. Misses,            1         0     0      2      0      0
Queen’s villas
Ifold, Mr., 33,                                      1      1      0
Bedford place

James, Mr., 45, High                                       10      6
street, Notting hill
James, Miss, 2,                                      1      1      0
Addison road
Jackson, Rev. J.,                                    1      0      0
Kensington palace
Jackson, Admiral,                                    2      0      0
21, Hornton street
Jeffries, Miss, 5,                                   1      1      0
Marlborough terrace
Jenings, Mr., 2,                                     2      2      0
Terrace
Jenkinson, Mr., 4,                                   1      0      0
Campden hill terrace
Jermyn, Rev. H. W.,                                  1      1      0
26A, Kensington
square
Johnson, Mr., 47,                      10     0
Notting hill square
Johnson, Mrs., 11,                                         10      0
Notting hill terrace
Jolly, Mrs., 40,                                           10      0
Bedford place
Jones, Mr., High                                     1      1      0
street

Kennedy, Rev. W. J.,                                 1      1      0
9, Campden hill
villas
Kidd, Mr. R. C.,                                     5      0      0
Hyde park gate
Kidd, Miss, ditto                                    1      1      0
King, Mrs., 29,                                      2      2      0
Kensington square
Kirwan, Miss, 6,              1         0     0      3      3      0
Lower Phillimore
place
Knevett, Miss, 20,                                          5      0
Lower Phillimore
place

Lascelles, Hon. W.                                   2      0      0
S. (V.P.), Campden
hill
Lascelles, Lady                                      2      0      0
Caroline, ditto
Lascelles, Miss,                                     1      0      0
ditto
Lady, A, by Miss                       10     0
Disbrowe
Lady, A, by Mr.                                             5      0
Simpson
Lateward, Rev. J.                                    2      2      0
F., 10, Notting hill
square
Lawrance, Mr., 10,                                          5      0
Church street
Legrew, Mr., 1,                                            10      0
Ladbroke place
Leicester, Mrs.,                                     1      1      0
Bullingham place
Lever, Mrs., 4,                                      1      0      0
Campden hill terrace
Lewis, Mrs., 7,                                            10      0
Edwardes square
Litchfield, Mr., 12,                                 1      1      0
Kensington square
Litt, Miss, 42,                                      1      1      0
Kensington square
Lomas, Mr., 34, High                                 1      1      0
street
Lutyens, Major, 9,            2         0     0
Upper Phillimore
place

M‘Caul, Mr., 43,                                           10      0
Kensington square
Mackay, Mrs., Ivy                                    2      2      0
bank, Notting hill
Mackay, Mrs. E., 17,                                 2      2      0
Scarsdale terrace
M‘Queen, Mr., 38,                                          10      0
Kensington square
Mair, Mrs., Cobie                                    2      2      0
house, High street
Makins, Mrs., 2,                                     2      2      0
Campden hill villas
Martin, Mrs., 13,                      10     0
Bedford place
Maurice, Rev. —, 7,                                  1      1      0
Ladbroke villas
Maurice, Miss, ditto                                 1      1      0
Merriman, Mr., 45,                                   3      3      0
Kensington square
Merriman, Miss C.,                                          2      6
ditto
Merriman, Mr. S.,                                           2      6
ditto
Merriman, Mr. W.,                                           2      6
ditto
Merriman, Mr. J. N.,                                 2      2      0
11, Young street
Merriman, Mrs., J.                                   1      1      0
N., ditto
Miley, Mr., 6, Upper                                 1      1      0
Phillimore place
Morris, Mr. R.,                                      2      2      0
Wright’s lane
Mortimer, Mr., 23,                                   2      2      0
Notting hill square
Moss, Mr., 1,                                        1      1      0
Terrace
Murray, Mr.                                          5      5      0

De Noüall, The                                       3      3      0
Baroness, 24, Upp.
Phillimore pl.
Nasmyth, Mrs.                          10     0
Needham, Miss,                                       2      2      0
Linden grove
Nicholls, Mr., 27,                                   1      1      0
Upper Phillimore
place

Osborn, Sir John,                                    1      1      0
Bart., Earl’s court
Oak, Mr., 36, High                                          5      0
street
Oliver, Mrs., 4,                                     1      1      0
Lansdowne terrace

Paine Mr., 2, Young                                  1      1      0
street
Pallister, Miss, 22,                                 1      1      0
Kensington square
Parker, Rev. J., 21,                                 1      1      0
Bedford place
Parkin, Mr., 13,                                     2      2      0
Notting hill terrace
Parkin, Mrs., ditto                                  1      1      0
Paxton, Mrs., 56,                                          10      0
High street
Payne, Mr. W., 15,                                   1      1      0
Hornton street
Paynter, Mr.,                                        1      1      0
Addison road
Penley, Major, 9,                                    1      1      0
Ladbroke villas
Penny, Rev. H., 12,                                  3      3      0
Upper Phillimore
place
Penny, Mrs., ditto                                   3      3      0
Perceval, Mr. John,                                  1      1      0
Campden cottage,
Notting hill square
Perring, Mrs., 9,                                    1      1      0
Rich terrace
Pickering, Mr., 4,                                   2      0      0
Pembroke road
Pickering, Miss,                                            5      0
Notting hill terrace
Pickering, Miss H.,                                         2      6
ditto
Pitt, Mrs., Wiple                                    1      1      0
place
Pitt, Miss, 31,                                      1      1      0
Kensington square
Pollard, Mr., 22,                                    1      0      0
Notting hill terrace
Pollock, Mr., 7,                                     1      1      0
Bath place
Pollock, Mrs. R., 6,                                 1      1      0
St. George’s terrace
Powell, Mrs., 18,                                    1      1      0
St. Mary Abbot’s
terrace
Pownall, Mr., 5,                                     1      0      0
Lower Phillimore
place

Quilter, Mrs. H., 5,                                 1      1      0
Campden hill villas

Rathbone, Mrs., 15,                                  1      1      0
Lower Phillimore
place
Richardson, Mr., 4,           2         2     0
Norland terrace
Rodney, Miss S., 7,                                  1      1      0
Gore
Rougemont, Mrs.,                                     1      1      0
Wright’s lane
Rougemont, Miss,                                     1      1      0
ditto
Rougemont, Miss                                      1      1      0
Helen, ditto
Rougemont, Mr. H.,                                   1      1      0
Wright’s lane
Rougemont, Mr.                                       2      2      0
Alex., 23,
Kensington square
Rougemont, Mrs. A.,                                  1      1      0
ditto
Roy, Mr., 6,                                         2      2      0
Lansdowne terrace
Rundall, Mrs., 13,                                   1      1      0
Earle’s terrace
Russell, Mr., 11,                                    1      1      0
Church Street
Rutter, Mrs., 5,                                     1      1      0
Young street

St. George, Mrs., 4,                                 1      0      0
Notting hill square
Senior, Mrs., Hyde                                   1      0      0
park gate
Seward, Miss, 44,                                    1      0      0
Notting hill square
Shaw, Mr. W. A.,                                     5      0      0
Wycombe lodge
Shephard, Mr., 7,                                    5      0      0
Kensington square
Shephard, Mrs.,                                      5      0      0
ditto
Shephard, Miss M.                                    1      1      0
A., ditto
Shepheard, The                                       4      4      0
Misses, Notting hill
house, Notting hill
square
Sheppard, Mrs., 5,                                   2      2      0
Ladbroke place
Simpson, Mr., 9,                                     1      1      0
Notting hill terrace
Slater, Mr., High                                    1      0      0
street
Smirke, Mrs. E.,                                     1      0      0
West cottage,
Bedford place
Smith, Mr. P., 11,                                   1      1      0
Hornton street
Smith, Rev. Theyre                                   1      1      0
T., 13, Notting hill
square
Sparrow, Mrs., 4,                                    2      2      0
High street
Stark, Mr., 17, High                                       10      6
street
Steer, Mrs., 27,                                            5      0
Notting hill terrace
Stephenson, Miss C.,                                 1      1      0
Kensington palace
Stollard, Mr., High                                  1      1      0
street, Gravel pits
Strange, Mrs. John,                                  2      2      0
2, Hornton villas
Swindley, Mrs., 10,                    14     0
Wiple place

Teed, Mrs., Campden                                  5      0      0
house
Thew, Mrs., Hyde                                     2      2      0
Park gate south
Thompson, Mr., 20,                                   2      2      0
Kensington square
Thompson, Mrs.,                                      1      1      0
ditto
Thompson, Miss,                                      1      1      0
ditto
Thompson, Mr. F.,                                    2      2      0
20, Kensington
square
Thurtle, Mr., 2,                                     1      1      0
Albert place
Tuck, Mr., Inspector                                 1      1      0
of Weights and
Measures, 5,
Mayfield place
Tyne, Mrs., 18, High                    2     6
street

Vallance, Mr., The                                   1      1      0
Villa, Notting hill
square
Vallis, Mr., 9,                                             5      0
Mayfield place
Vallotton, Mr.,                                      1      1      0
Clifton house, Old
Brompton
Vincent, Mr. H. W.,                                  2      0      0
Thornwood lodge,
Campden hill
Vincent, Mr., 1,                                     1      0      0
Upper Phillimore
place
Vyvyan, Miss, 10,                      10     0
Notting hill terrace

Willock, Sir H. and           5         0     0      3      0      0
Lady, (V.P.) Little
Campden house
Waddilove, Dr.,                                      2      2      0
D.C.L., 8, Ladbroke
place
Wade, Mr., 2, Upper                                  2      0      0
Phillimore place
Warburton, Mrs., 7,                                        10      0
Allen terrace
Ward, Dr. O., 9,                                     1      1      0
Leonard place
Warner, Mr., 9,                                      2      2      0
Kensington square
Webster, Mr., The                                    1      0      0
Mall
Weigall, Mr., 5,                                     2      2      0
Hanover terrace,
Notting hill
Weston, Mr., Hyde                                    2      2      0
park gate
White, Captain, 4,                                   1      1      0
Leonard place
White, Mr., 10,                                      1      1      0
Leonard place
Whitehouse, Mr.,                                     1      1      0
Bloomfield lodge,
Ladbroke terrace
Willis, Miss, Palace                                 1      1      0
green
Willis, Miss E.,                                     1      1      0
ditto
Willock, Major,                                      2      2      0
Vicarage place
Wilson, Mr., 1,                                      1      1      0
Phillimore terrace
Winn, Hon. Mrs., 26,                                 1      1      0
Upper Phillimore
place
Wiseman and Coles,                                         10      0
Messrs., 57, High
Street
Withers, Rev. E. W.,                                 1      1      0
31, Lower Phillimore
place
Woodcock, Mr., 4,                                          10      0
High street
Worthington, Mr., 3,                                        5      0
Mayfield place
Wynyard, Mrs. C.,                                    1      1      0
Kensington palace

Young, Miss, 25,                                     3      3      0
Kensington square

Special for St.               8        15     0
John’s Districts
Special                                              l     13      1

                                * * * * *

_Subscriptions and Donations received after December_ 31, 1845, _will
appear in next year’s list_.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

          Geo. Nichols, Printer, Earl’s Court, Leicester Square.




FOOTNOTES


{10}  See the Second Report, lately published, of the “Association for
promoting the Relief of Destitution in the Metropolis, and for improving
the Condition of the Poor, by means of Parochial and District Visiting,
under the superintendence and direction of the Bishop and Clergy.”  It
contains a large amount of most interesting information.  Copies may be
obtained by application to MR. HALY, at the Office of the Association,
No. 4, St. Martin’s Place, Trafalgar Square.  The Secretaries of this
Society will also endeavour to obtain copies for any parishioner who may
express a wish to that effect.

{11a}  Very frequently, however, they assert that they are resident, and
have long been resident, in the parish.  Without hesitation they name
their abode; which is often stated to be at a particular house in Gore
Lane.  No one unacquainted with the minute circumstances of each street
would suspect that the number they take care to select is one which does
_not exist_ in Gore Lane _at all_.  The deception is of course only
detected when the case is recommended to the District Visitor for
inquiry.

{11b}  It appears from the last Report of the Mendicity Society, who have
had opportunities of proving the fact upon an extensive scale, and have
endeavoured to apply such tests for the purpose as might discriminate
fairly between the idle and the unfortunate, that of 3289 applicants,
who, being able-bodied men, were offered work at stone-breaking, only 839
availed themselves of it, 1630 did not work at all, and 820 worked only
one day.  “Facts which, after making all reasonable allowances, would
lead to the conclusion that about three-fourths of the above applicants,
were persons who were quite satisfied to lead a life of idleness, and
determined to use no exertion to earn a subsistence.”

{12}  The following instance, among others, which show forcibly the
necessity of caution in this respect on the part of Residents and
Subscribers, appears in a communication from a Visitor to the
Secretaries:—“I have this day refused to give any relief in Mrs. —.
Firstly, because she appears to be forming a habit of making a regular
weekly application, on each Saturday.  Secondly, because anything given
in the District seems to be considered by her as justifying her in making
application.  Thirdly, because she uses bad language to her children, and
shows violence of conduct and temper.  Without naming other reasons, it
may suffice to say, that I have seen no one feature in her case entitling
it to so much attention, on account of character, conduct, or
circumstances, but the reverse.  She told me that she had acquainted a
lady yesterday, that I had not been in the District during the last
fortnight; I have been there _three times this week_, and given relief
where required.  A glance at the accounts will show that the —’s have,
when occasion has demanded it, participated largely in the funds of the
District Visiting Society; and that great caution is necessary to prevent
them and others from obtaining a regular winter allowance.”

{13}  “The present demoralizing system of begging—a thing so ruinous in
its effects, that the major part of the delinquents with which our
prisons are filled, owe their progress in crime to the encouragement
given to idle habits by the false feeling of charity acted upon by the
public, in the promiscuous dispensation of alms to those who are seldom,
if ever, deserving of them.”—_Report on Poverty_, _Mendicity_, _and
Crime_, _to the House of Lords in_ 1839, _by_ W. A. MILES, Esq.

{14}  In some districts the greatest inconvenience has been felt from
their unsettled condition.  The following is but one out of several
similar complaints on the part of Visitors:—“I have found the people
thankful for the little they receive.  But they are such a moving race,
that before I get acquainted with their habits they are off to another
quarter, and new people fill their places; this to me is most
unsatisfactory.”

{15}  “The present month, has afforded further evidence of the discontent
and disappointment produced by undiscriminating bounty.  The gift of
bread or coals to a certain _number_ of families taken indiscriminately,
or to _every_ poor person, in such a locality, is not only indiscreet but
unjust, and impedes the exertions of a society whose principle is to
discover and encourage the good, to deter the bad.”—_Report of a
Visitor_, _February_, 1845.

{16}  “The month of February appears to be the most trying to the poor of
this district.  Their little savings, if any, have been exhausted; their
clothes and furniture are gradually being taken to the pawnbroker; hunger
and cold are producing disease, unless timely help is afforded. . . .
The clock is generally the first article sent to the pawnbroker; then the
wife’s articles of wearing apparel; the children’s shoes, the husband’s
coat and waistcoat; and afterwards his tools, his spade, his saw, &c.
The last portion of property, is the bedding and furniture, when shavings
are substituted.  Such seem to be the regular gradations of distress.
The last, happily, has seldom been witnessed since the first month or two
of the Society’s operations in this district.  It was pointed out to me
to-day in another place.”—_Report of a Visitor_.  _February_ 1845.

{17a}  A subject intimately connected with that noticed above, viz. the
relation between IGNORANCE and SOCIAL MISERY, has received some
remarkable illustrations from the practical operations of this Society.

It would appear from the amount of relief administered in certain
districts, selected for the calculation on account of their remote
distances from one another, and from their containing a labouring
population exclusively, that, although subject to modifications from the
peculiar character and condition of the inhabitants, or from
circumstances of an accidental nature in each case, yet the same law is
found in the mass to prevail throughout; PHYSICAL DISTRESS AND WANT OF
EDUCATION ARE EXHIBITED AS CO-EXISTING IN A DIRECT RATIO.

Omitting, for brevity, 80 families of intermediate degrees of education,
it appears that of the remaining 100 families respecting whom the
calculation was made, the amount of relief required by those in which
neither father nor mother could read, or one of them imperfectly, has
been actually _twice as much per head_ as by those in which either father
or mother could read and write well.

The attention of the Committee was drawn to this important subject in
consequence of the Report of an Intelligent Visitor.  The result of his
experience shows that, in his district, “distress has been very much in
proportion to the deplorable ignorance of the recipients.  More than half
the relief has been given to persons who could neither read nor write.”

Upon this fact he has founded an energetic appeal for measures to be
taken to provide for the education of the adult population, so far as
practicable.  The Committee trust that the liberality of the Subscribers
may put it into their power to co-operate with the Clergy in adopting
measures for the purpose, which the limited means at their disposal have
up to this time rendered impossible.

{17b}  It seems desirable to mention that in both the years 1844 and 1845
the benefits of the Coal Fund have extended over the whole of
Kensington—St. Mary Abbots, St. John’s, and St. James’s.  A Coal Fund and
Clothing Fund have also been established in St. Barnabas’ District
supported by local contributions.

{19}  “It very gratifying” writes a visitor, “to observe the alacrity
with which the women went to their boxes to get out their Clothing Fund
cards and money.  [The deposits were collected weekly by the Visitor in
person.]  The exchequer of the poor in this, an Irish district, generally
consists of a few shillings deposited within a very small box carefully
kept within two or three other boxes, or at the bottom of an old chest.
On no one occasion has any bad money been offered to him.  The money is
generally, indeed invariably, paid by the females.  The confidence with
which they give their money is a trait not to be unnoticed; it being
often difficult to prevent them paying their money in the street, and
without any card or check.  When the Visitor has been prevented from
calling at the time appointed, they have very frankly and very properly
reminded him of it.”

{20a}  It not unfrequently happens that residents have needle-work,
charing, or other work to be done, and are at a loss to know where to
find respectable persons to undertake it.  A reference to a District
Visitor will both supply their want and at the same time obtain
employment for some deserving individual to whom it may prove an
invaluable assistance.  A large number of sempstresses, charwomen,
laundresses, &c., depend solely upon the work which they are casually
able to obtain.

{20b}  The intervention of the Visitors has been productive of most
valuable assistance in many other respects.  The following instances have
been reported as occurring in a SINGLE district:

Mrs. A. came to me in great distress in consequence of her goods being
about to be seized for rent.  She owed about a pound; she begged of me to
save them.  She stated that in about a fortnight she should go out as a
monthly nurse, and then she should be able to pay.  She had told her
landlord this but he was inexorable.  In consequence of my opinion of her
character, I called on the landlord and reasoned with him, and begged a
little time for the poor woman; which he granted me.  _She has since
discharged the debt_.

In another instance:—“B. had been long out of work; at last he got
employment; but on the first week, late on Saturday night, he came to me
in great perplexity to tell me that his landlord to whom he owed 3s. 6d.
had entered the house during the time his wife and himself had been out,
and turned his children and little furniture into the street and locked
the door; and where to put his head under with his family he did not
know.”  The immediate intervention of the Visitor succeeded in obtaining
from the landlord permission for the poor family to stop there until they
could get some other habitation.

. . . “I found Mrs. C. lying in extreme debility from inflammation of the
chest, and in great distress of mind from fears of her destitute
condition.  She said it appeared almost like an interposition of
Providence that I had come to see her. . . .  She told me that she and
her husband had partly gained a living by selling vegetables to a lady,
and by occasionally being employed by her; but for some cause they had
been discharged from their employment and ordered not to come near the
house.  She wished me to get her an interview with the lady, as soon as
she could get out.  I ventured to write to her stating all the
particulars.  She promptly, the next morning, sent to tell the woman to
come as soon as she was able.  An interview taking place, the secret came
out that the lady’s cook wanted to obtain that a tradesman in town whom
she knew should supply her mistress; and accordingly had represented the
poor woman to her as imposing and ungrateful.  On vindicating her own
character, the lady restored her to her former position.  I have since
been enabled to give them a character from personal observation that has
enabled them to get the charge of a gentleman’s house, who is so
satisfied with them that he has personally thanked me.  The poor couple’s
gratitude has been great to the Society for thus rescuing them from
poverty and disgrace, and placing them in comparative comfort.”

. . . “I had known D. and his wife to be cleanly, industrious, and
upright people; but the husband having a serious attack of illness was
laid up three months, during which time the rent accumulated to £4.  The
landlord seized on their furniture, which if it had been sold, must have
broken up their home for ever.  She applied to me in her distress.  On
making her case known to the managers of the District Visiting Society,
they obtained (from private sources) a loan of the part she was not able
to make up, and saved them from destruction.  A part of the money that
was lent has been returned.  The continued illness of the man I believe
to be the only reason why the whole has not.”

{21}  Any person may obtain Bibles and Prayer Books at the prices of the
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, by applying at the depôt at
the Girls’ National School Room, on any Monday, between one and two
o’clock _only_; the Mistress having kindly consented to take charge of
them.

{22}  The following short extracts from reports by various Visitors will
exhibit some of the difficulties with which they have to contend, as well
as many grounds of encouragement and anticipation of better things to
come.

“Of the persons in this district, there is much to be hoped from the
gratitude of the families who have been relieved, and from the symptoms
of self exertion that are beginning to exhibit themselves, shown by the
subscriptions to the Coal and Clothing Funds.”

“The people have generally appeared quiet and cheerful, and have shown
every outward mark of respect and gratitude for the assistance rendered
them by the Society.”

“I feel convinced that the trifling assistance supplied during sickness
or the temporary want of employment, has been in many instances of the
greatest importance to the sufferer, sometimes saving his little all from
the pawnbroker, and enabling him to struggle through his difficulties.”

“The District Visiting Society’s funds are highly beneficial in my
district; and have been so especially in S’s case; also F’s, and B’s,
M’s, and B’s.  All has been most gratefully received.  I feel great
comfort in knowing much good has been done. . . .  There is severe
distress in my small district. . . . ”

“In a district,” it is reported, “where one day was remarkable if spent
without some disgraceful scene of drunken brawling taking place, a day of
brawls has now become the day to be remarked. . . .  The most profligate
characters have left the district, finding they have not the attention
paid them that others have. . . .  Christmas day (last) was spent without
one drunken scene; a circumstance unknown for many years—almost within
the memory of the ‘oldest inhabitant.’”

Several instances have occurred of famines of bad character having
migrated first from district to district, and then, finding that each
successive Visitor was aware of their character and withheld relief from
them, have finally emigrated from the parish altogether.  In two
instances in particular, families of a very bad class left, giving out
that it was in consequence of the inspection of the Visitor.  It is
needless to add that by all respectable poor, the attention and personal
interest of the Visitor is invariably courted, and gratefully
acknowledged.

{23}  Individuals who desire to visit personally and to relieve from
their own resources a small number of poor families, but who are unable
to take charge of a District, are requested to communicate with the
Clergy upon the subject.  It will not be difficult to make arrangements
by which such benevolent persons may be provided with a field of labour
proportioned to the time and the funds at their disposal.



