

Transcribed from the 1905 Ab Owen edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                                GEIRIADUR
                            CYMRAEG A SAESNEG
                                   BYR.


                            YN BENNAF AR SAIL
                    _DICTIONARIUM BRITANNICO-LATINUM_
                        DR. JOHN DAVIES o Fallwyd.

                                  AC AR

                      “Y GYMRAEG YN EI DISGLEIRDEB”
                        THOMAS JONES o’r Amwythig.

                          Llanuwchllyn, AB OWEN
                      Conwy, R. E. JONES A’I FRODYR.
                                  1905.




Rhagymadrodd.


Amcan y Geiriadur hyr bwn yw rhoddi ychydig gymorth i efrydwyr Cymraeg y
canol oesoedd.  Denwyd fi at y gwaith, oherwydd nad oes Eiriadur hawdd ei
gael i lenyddiaeth Cymreig y cyfnod rhwng Gruffydd ab Cynan a Beibl 1588.

Fy amcan cyntaf oedd cywiro a thalfyrru cyfieithiad Thomas Jones o
_Dictionarium Britannico-Latinum_ Dr. Davies.  Y Geiriadur Cymreig a
Lladin a Lladin a Chymraeg hwn yw’r goreu eto; ond y mae yn anghyflawn,
ac nid yw yn hawdd i’w gael.  Ysgrifennodd y Dr. Davies ei ragymadrodd
i’w Eiriadur y dydd olaf o Fai, 1632.  Cyhoeddodd Thomas Jones ei
gyfieithiad ohono yn 1688.

Drwy annog yr Athraw J. Morris Jones, penderfynais wneyd ychwaneg na
chywiro a chrynhoi; gwnes y Geiriadur mor gyflawn ag y gallwn drwy fy
narllen fy hun, a chymorth Geiriaduron diweddarach.  Defnyddiais, yn
enwedig, _Archæologia_ Edward Lluyd, 1707; Geiriadur Dr. W. Owen Pughe,
1803, rhyfeddod o wybodaeth a llafur, er ei ddamcaniaethau ofer a’i
ddychmygion gwyllt; a Geiriadur anghyflawn fy hen athraw D. Silvan Evans,
gyda’r hwn y bu farw yn 1903 gymaint o gof o bethau Cymreig.

Mor bell ac y gallwn farnu,—oddiwrth lenyddiaeth, enwau lleoedd, a’r
defnydd wneir ar lafar o eiriau’n awr,—yr oedd pob gair sydd yn y
Geiriadur hwn ar arfer yn 1588.  Felly nid yw’r llyfr bychan hwn yn
rhoddi cymorth i ddangos fel y tyfodd yr iaith er cyfnod cyfieithu’r
Beibl.

Edrychodd yr Athraw J. Morris Jones drwy y rhan fwyaf o’r proflenni.
Achubodd fi o amryw byllau, ychwanegodd rai geiriau, a bu ei gyngor yn
dra gwerthfawr.  Ond na ddalier ef yn gydgyfrifol am un gwall; gallai fod
yn y llyfr wallau na welodd ef, a hwyrach na ddilynwyd ei gyngor bob
amser.

Gwnes fy ngoreu, ond gwn fod y llyfr yn amherffaith.  A gaf fi ofyn i
efrydwyr hanes a llenyddiaeth Cymru yn y canol oesoedd roddi prawf arno,
a gwneyd rhestrau o eiriau a dyfyniadau, fel y gallaf ei wella?

                                                          OWEN M. EDWARDS.

_Coleg Lincoln_, _Rhydychen_.
Ionawr 30, 1905.




Y Wyddor Gymraeg.


A
B
C
Ch
D
Dd
E
F
Ff
G
Ng
H
I
L
Ll
M
N
O
P
Ph
R
S
T
Th
U
W
Y




Enwau.


Adda, Adam.

Awstin, Augustine.

Buddug, Boudicca.

Caradog, Caratacus.

Dafydd, David.

Dewi, David.

Du, black.

Efa, Eve.

Emrys, Ambrose.

Ercwlf, Hercules.

Fychan (“small”), Vaughan.

Fferyll, Vergil, magician, chemist.

Ffraid, Bridget, Bride.

Ffwg, Foulk.

Gwilym, William.

Iago, James.

Ieuan, Ifan, John.

Io, Job.

Ioan, John.

Iwl, Julius.

Llwyd, brown.

Mair, Mary.

Mihangel, Michael.

Moesen, Moses.

No, Noe, Noah.

Pedr, Peter.

Rhosser, Roger.

Selyf, Solomon.

Siarlymaen, Charlemagne.

Siaspar, Jasper.

Sion, John.

Sior, George.

Suddas, Judas.

Tewdws, Pleiades.

Wynn, white.

Ystas, Statius, Tacitus.




Enwau Lleoedd.


Aberhonddu, Aberhodni, Brecon.

Abermaw, Barmouth.

Aber Mynwy, Monmouth.

Abertawe, Swansea.

Aberteifi, Cardigan.

Aifft, Egypt.

Almaen, Germany.

Amwythig, Shrewsbury.

Baddon, Bath.

Bannau Brycheiniog, Brecknock Beacons.

Bêm, Bohemia.

Bristo, Bridstone.

Brosil, Brussels.

Broŵyr, Gower.

Brycheiniog, Breconshire.

Bryn Buga, Usk.

Bryneich, Bernicia.

Bryste, Bristol.

Bwrdios, Bordeaux.

Caer, Chester.

Caer Aranrod, Northern Crown.

Caercystenyn, Constantinople.

Caer Dulyn, Dublin.

Caerdydd, Caerdyf, Cardiff.

Caerefrog, York.

Caerfyrddin, Carmarthen.

Caergaint, Canterbury.

Caergrawnt, Cambridge.

Caer Gwydion, The Milky Way.

Caergybi, Holyhead.

Caer Lil, Carlisle.

Caerloew, Glosedr, Gloucester.

Caerludd, London.

Caer Lyr, Leicester.

Caerlleon ar Wysg, Caerleon.

Caersalem, Jerusalem.

Caerwrangon, Worcester.

Caerŵyr, Swansea.

Caint, Kent.

Casllwchwr, Loughor.

Casnewydd, Newport (Mon).

Castell Gwys, Wiston Castle.

Castell Moel, Green Castle.

Castell Nedd, Neath.

Ceintun, Kineton, Kington.

Ceredigion, Cardiganshire.

Cernyw, Cornwall.

Cilgwri, Wirral.

Clas ar Wy, Glasbury.

Coedllai, Leeswood.

Colunwy, Clun.

Conach, Connaught.

Croesoswallt, Oswestry.

Crughywel, Crickhowel.

Cwlen, Cologne.

Deifr, Deira.

Dinas y Garrai, Castor.

Dinbych, Denbigh.

Dinbych y Pysgod, Tenby.

Dulyn, Dublin.

Dyfrdwy, Dee.

Dyffryn Aur, Golden Vale.

Dyffryn Clwyd, Vale of Clwyd.

Dyffryn Tefeiddiog, Vale of Teme.

Efelfre, Velfrey.

Eglwys Wen, Whitchurch.

Eidal, Italy.

Enlli, Bardsey.

Ergin, Archenfield.

Eryri, the Snowdon Range.

Estyn, Holt.

Ewsam, Evesham.

Ffrainc, France.

Gien, Guienne.

Glyn Teyrnon, Llantarnam.

Grwyn, Gaveren.

Gwasgwyn, Gascony.

Gwebl, Weobly.

Gwyndud, Gwynedd, North Wales, north west Wales.

Gwynfryn, Whitney.

Gwyr, Gower.

Hafren, Severn.

Hendy Gwyn, Whitland.

Henffordd, Hereford.

Hwlffordd, Haverfordwest.

Hymyr, Humber, (parish).

Iorddonen, Jordan.

Iwerddon, Ireland.

Lerpwl, Liverpool.

Lesedr, Leicester.

Llanbedr, Pont Stephan, Lampeter.

Llandudoch, St. Dogmels.

Llanelwy, St. Asaph.

Llaneurgain, Northop.

Llanfair ym Muallt, Builth.

Llanllieni, Leominster.

Llanymddyfri, Llandovery.

Llinwent, Leintwardine.

Lloegr, England.

Llundain, London.

Llychlyn, the Baltic.

Llydaw, Brittany.

Llynlleifiad, Liverpool.

Llyn Tegid, Bala Lake.

Maelor Gymraeg, Bromfield.

Maesalegr, Bassaleg.

Maes Glas, Greenfield.

Maesyfed, Radnorshire.

Manaw, Man.

Moel Rhon, Skerries.

Môn, Anglesea.

Morgannwg, Glamorgan.

Mor Nudd, English Channel.

Mynwy, Monmouth.

Mynydd Du, Carmarthen Vans.

Mynyw, St. David’s.

Nanhyfer, Nevern.

Nant y Nordd, Humber.

Niwbwrch, Newborough.

Penarlâg, Hawarden.

Penbrys, Pembridge.

Penfro, Pembroke.

Penybont, Bridgend.

Pont ar Fynach, Devil’s Bridge.

Pont Faen, Cowbridge.

Porthaethwy, Menai Bridge.

Powis, St. Paul’s.

Prydain Britain.

Prydyn, Scotland, Britain.

Rhosiel, La Rochelle.

Rhosyr, Newborough.

Rhuthyn, Ruthin.

Rhydychen, Oxford.

Siep, Cheapside.

Sisedr, Chichester.

Tafwys, Thames.

Talacharn, Laugharne.

Tegeingl, Englefield.

Trallwm, Trallwng, Welshpool.

Trefaldwyn, Montgomery.

Trefdraeth, Newport (Pemb.)

Trefhedyn, Adpar.

Tref Ludd, Ludlow.

Treffynon, Holywell.

Tre’r Delyn, Harpton Court.

Twr Alaher, Alhambra.

Twr Gwyn, Tower of London.

Tyddewi, St. David’s.

Wy, Wye.

Wysg, Usk.

Y Drefnewydd, Newtown.

Y Ddena, Forest of Dean.

Y Fan, The Sugar Loaf.

Y Felallt, Beeston.

Y Fenni, Abergavenny.

Y Feri, Ferryside.

Y Gelli, Hay.

Y Waen, Chirk.

Y Werydd, the Atlantic.

Y Wyddfa, Snowdon.

Y Wyddgrug, Mold.

Ynys Lawd, South Stack.

Ynys yr Ia, Iceland.

Ystog, Churchstoke, Erbistock.

Ystrad Fflur, Strata Florida.

Ystrad Marchell, Strata Marcella.




Geiriadur.


A.


A, and, with, whether.

Ab, a son; âb, an ape.

Abad, an abbot; abades, an abbess; abadaeth, an abbotship; abaty, an
abbey.

Aball, defect, infirmity; aballu, to perish, fail.

Aban, war, battle.

Abar, a carcase; filthiness.

Abediw, heriot.

Aber, a brook of running-water.

Aberth, an offering, sacrifice; aberthu, to offer, to sacrifice;
aberthawr, a sacrificer, a priest.

Abl, sufficient, able; abledd, ability.

Abo, abwy, a dead carcase, carrion.

Abred, Hades, Chaos.

Abrwysgl, very large, big, thick.

Absen, absence, slandering, or back-biting; absennwr, a back-biter,
slanderer.

Abwyd, food, bait.

Ac, and.

Acen, accent.

Actwn, a coat of mail, breast-work, battlement.

Acw, there.

Ach, achau, a genealogy, pedigree; achwr, a writer of pedigrees.

Achadw, to keep.

Achar, he will love.

Achen, kind, generation, need; achenog, poor, needy.

Achenu, to sing; achenedd, a sonnet, song.

Aches, a river.

Achlân, all.

Achles, a place of refuge, sanctuary; achlesu, to comfort, shelter.

Achludd, to hide secretly, conceal.

Achor, encircled; thin, little.

Achos, achaws, cause, reason.

Achre, achwre, apparel, dress.

Achrê, yea, rather.

Achreth, a trembling; achrethu, to tremble.

Achretawr, a creditor, or one that gives credit.

Achrwm, crooked, ill shaped.

Achrwym, a tie, bondage.

Achub, defend, protect.

Achul, lean, thin.

Achwedd, kindred; evening.

Achwyn, to complain, accuse.

Achwys, a cause, reason.

Adaf, hand.

Adafael, a pawning, pledge, attachment.

Adail, a building; adeilad, to build; adeiladwr, a builder.

Adain, a wing, spoke of a wheel; adeiniog, winged; adanedd, adenydd,
adeinydd, wings, the spokes of a wheel.

Adameg = dameg, parable; a riddle.

Adar, birds; adar llwch gwin, vultures, griffins; adar y bwnn, bitterns;
adar y drudwy, starlings; adar y tô, sparrows; adardy, a bird cage;
adarwr, a fowler; aderyn, a bird.

Adaw, to leave.

Adblygu, to unfold.

Adefyn, thread, yarn.

Adeg, time, opportunity; adeg troad y lleuad, neu rhwng y llawn lleuad
a’r newid, the decrease of the moon.

Adfail, a ruin, the fall of a building; adfeilio, to languish, fail,
decay.

Adfain, adfan, a stranger.

Adfant, vain, despicable.

Adfeddylied, to recollect.

Adferu, to restore, return.

Adflas, an ill taste, unsavoury.

Adfwl, atarw, a bull half gelt.

Adfyd, adversity; adfydig, wretched, miserable, poor.

Adfydd, perhaps.

Adiad, a duck, or drake.

Adian, progeny, posterity.

Adill, vile, abject.

Adladd, adlodd, lattermath, or the grass that groweth where hay was
lately mowed.

Adlais, an echo.

Adlam, a leap back, rebound.

Adlaw, of a base, mean offspring; adlawiaid, the poorest, lowest, or
smallest sort of people.

Adnabod, to know.

Adnau, a gage, pledge, stake.

Adnaw, to keep, possess; adnair, to be kept, possessed; adnes, efe a
gadwodd, he kept.

Adnod, verse.

Adolwg, atolwg, a beseeching, petitioning.

Adorth, diligence, industry.

Adran, a subdivision.

Adrodd, restoring, to declare, to relate.

Adrybedd, a certainty.

Adryfedd, superfluities.

Adrywedd, to trace, track.

Adseinio, to resound, or make an echo, to repeat after another.

Adwaen, adwen, I know.

Adwair, second crop of hay.

Adwaith, re-making, making better, amending.

Adwedd, a returning; adwedda, to return.

Adwerth, cheap.

Adwledd, dobor, byr-bryd, a short meal of meat.

Adwydd, fallow ground; shrub.

Adwy, a gap, breach.

Adwyar, conflicting, toiling.

Adwyn, I know.

Adwynig, shining, glittering.

Adwyth, an infection that takes away the use of the limbs; hurt.

Adyn, wretched, miserable man.

Adda, Adam.

Addail, snafedd y dwfr, the filth which the waters cast up; foliage.

Addangc, math ar bryf, ar yr hwn y ty mân flew a wnelo hetie da, a
beaver.

Addas, apt, fit, convenient, commodious, due; addasrwydd, aptness,
fitness; addasu, to make fit, to accommodate.

Addaw, addo, to promise; addewid, a promise.

Addawd, a store-house, warehouse, treasure-house.

Addef, to confess; a little dwelling.

Addfain, main, a banished person; slender, delicate.

Addfed, ripe; addfedu, to grow ripe.

Addfwyn, meek, courteous.

Addiant, somewhat lean; longing.

Addien, fair, beautiful.

Addod, wy addod, wy’r nyth, an egg left or laid in the nest; a warehouse.

Addoed, age; addoedi, to prolong the time.

Addoedd, he went, departed.

Addoer, cold.

Addoli, doli, to adore, worship.

Addon, fruit; offspring.

Addug, aim; violence, force.

Addug, he took, carried.

Adduned, diowryd, a vow, an oath; adduno, to vow.

Addurn, an ornament, a scheme; addurno, to adorn, make neat.

Addwyd, an ulcer.

Addwyd, you went; addwyf, I went.

Addwyn, honest, just; addwynder, justice, honesty, equity.

Aeg = -eg, a language.

Ael, the eye-brow; a hem, border; nigh, near, unto.

Aele, painful, grievous, sad.

Aelgeth, aelgaeth, aelgerth, the chin, the jaw-bone.

Aelod, a member, limb.

Aelwyd, a fire-hearth.

Aer, aerawd, an engagement, battle; aerdren, battle fury; aerdrawd, a
walking, gait, manner of going to battle; aerfa, a slaughter; aerflawdd,
quick, swift in battle; aergad, an engagement, fight between armies;
aergrain, to lie along, to be spread about on the battle field; aerfen,
battle, war.

Aerfen, Dyfrdwy, the Dee.

Aeron, summer fruits.

Aes, a shield; aesawr, yr hwn a gario aes; aesdalch, a shield; aesdrai,
yr hwn a gollodd ei aes mewn rhyfel; aesdwnn, yr hwn yr hacied ei aes
mewn ffrau; aesfrau, yr hwn a bo ei aes yn frau.

Aesdrawd = aerdrawd.

Aesel, surder a wnelir o grabas, verjuice.

Aeserw, glistering, bright.

Aeth, he went; grief.

Aethnen, aethwydden, aspen.

Aethwellt, yr ail gnwd o wair, grass cut the second time.

Afagddu, darkness, hell.

Afais, a bird.

Afal, an apple; afal peatus, a peach; afal gronynog, a pomegranate;
afallen, an apple-tree, a crab-tree; afallach, an orchard.

Afangc = addangc.

Afar, grief, sadness.

Afiaith, mirth, cheerfulness; afieuthus, merry, cheerful.

Afiechyd, unhealthfulness.

Aflafar, dumb; inarticulate, harsh.

Aflednais, rhampus, gwilwstaidd, immodest, rude.

Aflêr, weak; slovenly.

Aflwydd, aflwyddiant, misfortune, calamity; aflwyddiannus, unfortunate.

Afluniaidd, deformed.

Afneued, a longing after, desire.

Afon, a river.

Afrad, lavishness; afradu, to make away lavishly.

Afraid, needless.

Afrddwl, awrddwl, anxious, sad.

Afrifed, aneiri, innumerable.

Afrllad, teisen deneu, a wafer.

Afrwydd, rhwystrys, unsuccessful; afrwydd-deb, unfortunate.

Afrys, anniben, araf, slow.

Afu, the liver.

Afwch, awch, an edge, vigour, vehemence.

Afwyn, awyn, ffrwyn, a rein of a bridle.

Affaith, rhannog o ddireidi, accessary; affeithiol, being accessary;
affeithiwr, he that is accessary.

Affan, deep; “uffern affan.”

Affleu, the lap; a grip.

Affwys, the very bottom.

Ag, with.

Agalen, a whetstone.

Agarw, agerw, rough, rugged.

Agatfydd, agatoedd, perhaps.

Agde, angdde, very broad, large.

Agen, a chink, a cleft; agenog, full of clefts.

Ager, agerdd, angar, heat, vapour, exhaltation, steam.

Agne, a colour.

Agori, egor, to open; agored, opened, open; agoriawdr, agorwr, he that
openeth; agoriad, allwydd, a key.

Agos, near, hard by, almost.

Agro, very heavy; sad.

Agweddi, a portion, dowry.

Agwrdd, strong, stout.

Agŵyr, lletgam, awry, askew, very crooked.

Ang, eheng, broad, large.

Angad, a hand.

Angau, ange, death; angeuol, deadly, mortal.

Angel, an angel.

Angell, an arm, the shoulder, a wing.

Angen, necessity, want; anghenus, needy.

Angerdd, heat, combustion.

Anghanmol, to dispraise.

Anghardd, _vide_ cardd.

Anghawr, angor, covetous; anghawrdeb, covetousness.

Anghenfil, a monster.

Angherdded, the error of a traveller; misfortune.

Anghof, to forget; forgetfulness.

Anghred, unbelief, incredulity; that part of the world that is not
Christian; anghredu, to disbelieve.

Anghrawn, one that has not heaped up riches.

Anghrist, anti-Christ.

Anghychwiawr, unequal, unlike.

Anghyfarch, anything taken away the owner not knowing it, or without his
leave, felony; anghyfarchwr, he that takes a thing without the owner’s
leave.

Anghyfartal, incomparable.

Anghyfiaith, a strange language.

Anghyflwr, an unhappy condition.

Anghyfnerth, anghyfnerthi, weakness, infirmity.

Anghyfodedyn, immoveable.

Anghyfraith, unlawfulness.

Anghyffelyb, unlike.

Anghyffred, incomprehensible.

Anghymes, too much, excess.

Anghyngel = anghenfil.

Anghynnwys, incompact, incontinent, not sufferable.

Anghysbell, afar off, far distant.

Anghyson, dissonant, disagreeing in sound; anghysondeb, a disagreeing in
sound, not well rhymed; anghysoni, to make false rhymes.

Angladd, a funeral.

Anglef, a great voice, or noise.

Angnawd, unaccustomed.

Angor, covetous; anchor.

Angraifft, a correction, rebuke; an example; angreifftio, to disprove, to
chide.

Angraff, dull-sighted, simple.

Anguriol, wonderful, cruel.

Aha, ha, ha, a token of rejoicing; an expression, of derision.

Ai, whether, who; ai hwn? is it this?  Aie?  Is it so?

Aig, a great company, most properly of fishes; sea.

Ail, the second; ailun, eulyn, an effigy, image.

Aillt, a slave.

Ainc, a burning lust.

Ais, asennau, the ribs, laths.

Aith, eithin, furze, gorse.

Alaeth, lamentations, groans, bewailing.

Alaf, wealth.

Alarch, a swan.

Alaru, to surfeit.

Alaw, the lily.

Albras, a cross-bow; albrysiwr, one who shoots with a cross-bow.

Alcam, alcan, copper, tin.

Alch, an iron grate.

Alfarch, gwayw, a stitch or pricking disease.

Aliw = haliw.

Aliwn, an alien.

Almarchu, bwrw’r dail, to shed the leaves.

Almari, a cupboard.

Alon = galon, _pl._ of gal, gelyn, enemies.

Alwar, a purse, leather bags.

All, other.

Allan, out, without; allan o law, out of hand.

Allmor, a valley, a dale.

Allt, gallt, an ascent, up-hill.

Alltraw, a god-father.

Alltred, a strange place.

Alltud, a stranger; alltudo, to banish; alltudaeth, alltudedd,
banishment, exile.

Allwest, a pasture.

Allwlad, a stranger.

Allwydd, allwedd, a key; allwyddawr, a key-keeper.

Allwynin, sad, heavy.

Allwys, arllwys, to pour out.

Am, for, because.

Amad, amhad, seed.

Amaerwy, godre dillad, rhidens, the hem, or fringe of a garment.

Amaeth, arddwr, a husbandman, ploughman; amaethu, to plough, to play the
husbandman; amaethad, hwsmonaeth, husbandry.

Amar, amharu, dechreu methu, dechreu gollwng, beginning to loosen, to
fail.

Amarch, amharch, despite, discredit, disgrace; amerchi, amherchi, to
dishonour, to disgrace.

Amcan, a purpose, intent, conjecture; amcanu, to intend, to conjecture.

Amcoch, amgoch, pur loew goch, a shining red.

Amcrain, ymgreinio, a wallowing or tumbling on the ground; amcreinio,
ymgreinio, to tumble down on the back, as horses use to do.

Amdaw, daw im, it will come to me.

Amdlawd, very poor.

Amdo, a shroud.

Amdrai, diminished.

Amdrwch, cut and mangled.

Amdrwm, heavy; amdrymu, to grow heavy; amdrymder, heaviness.

Amddwll, sad, heavy.

Amddyfrwys, watery, moist.

Ameg, dameg, a riddle.

Amgant, about, all about, a circuit.

Amgarn, a ferrule.

Amgen, better, otherwise; amgenu, to exceed.

Amgoed, woody.

Amguedd, our dear secrets, our choicest goods.

Amgyffrawd, amgyffred, to be embraced, to comprehend.

Amgylch, about, all round; amgylchedd, circumference, circuit; amgylchu,
amgylchynu, to besiege, to encompass.

Amhad, had cymysg, sown with mingled seeds.

Amhar, amhariad, out of order, indisposed; amharu, to wax or make out of
order.

Amheuthun, novelty, dainty; amheuthunion, delicacies, rare delicate
meats.

Amhwyllog, mad, foolish.

Amis, clothes, an amice.

Ami, often, frequent, plentiful; amledd, amlder, abundance.

Amlaw, a glove.

Amliw, a variable colour, glimpse; amliwiog, of divers colours.

Amlwg, clear, very visible; amlygu, to make manifest, to declare;
amlygyn, a goal or mark to run at, or to play at.

Amnad, shouting, proclaiming.

Amnaid, a nod or beck; amneidio, to beckon, to nod with the head.

Amnawdd, protected, fortified round about.

Amner, a purse, a leather bag.

Amnhedd, to beseech or intreat.

Amnifer, an unequal number; amniferog, amniferwch, that which is of an
unlike number.

Amnoeth, naked.

Amobr, tribute, tax; maiden fee.

Amod, a covenant; amodol, conditional; amodi, to covenant.

Amogawr, an habitation.

Amor, fortune; “hawdd amor,” hail!

Amorth, anlwc, misfortune, disgrace.

Amrafael, ffrau, discord, strife; diverse, differing in quality or
quantity; amrafaelu, to disgrace, to be at strife.

Amraint, that which is against the law of a city.

Amrant llygad, the upper eye-brow, the eye-lid.

Amrhudd, imprudent, simple.

Amrhyd, unseasonableness.

Amrwd, raw, unboiled.

Amrosgo, very large, great.

Amryfus, doing a thing without considering, or forgetfully; amryfusedd,
an error, a mistake.

Amryffleu, large, great.

Amrygant, several hundreds.

Amrygoll, loss hurt, perdition.

Amrygwydd, falling diversely, or several ways.

Amrylaw, several hands.

Amryliw, of diverse colours.

Amrylon, frequently merry.

Amryson, to contend, strive, dispute.

Amsathr, a trodden place.

Amser, time; amseroi, seasonable, timely; amserolder, seasonableness,
opportunity; amseru, to do a thing in season, and without delay.

Amug, he defended; amwg, he defends; amwyn, to defend.

Amweddi, a solemn supplication, public prayer.

Amwisg, amdo, a shroud, a winding sheet.

Amwlch, whole, without a crack or hole, solid.

Amws, a stallion, a stone-horse.

Amwynt, unhealthfulness, sickliness.

Amwys, amheus, doubtful.

Amwyth, anger.

Amyd, bread-corn; mixed corn.

Amyn, unless, except, lacking, but.

Amynedd, patience.

Amysgar, amysgaroedd, the bowels, the guts.

Anach, the hindering cause of a thing.

Anadl, breath; anadlu, to breathe.

Anaele, grief, pain, torment, incurable disease or wound.

Anaf, maimedness, lameness, defect; anafu, to maim, lame, hurt; anafus,
maimed, mangled, hurt; anafod, ulcers.

Anair, infamy, calumny.

Anamser, unseasonable time; anamserol, unseasonable; anamserolder,
unseasonableness.

Anardymer, unseasonableness.

Anau, things that grow of their own accord, or unsown.

Anaw, music, a musician.

Ancr, an anchorite, an hermit; ancres, a nun.

Ancwyn, the second course, junkets, dainties, sweetmeats.

Andaw, to hear, to harken.

Aneirif, innumerable.

Anesgor, incurable, inevitable, insuperable.

Anelwig, unformed, without shape.

Anfab, unfruitful, barren.

Anfad, impious, wicked.

Anfodd, against the will; anfoddog, unwilling, discontented; anfoddhau,
anfodloni, to displease; anfoddlawn, anfodlon, discontented.

Anfoes, evil manners, irreverence; anfoesgar, ill bred, unmannerly.

Anfri, irreverence, stubborness.

Anffawd, misfortune, bad luck; anffodiog, unfortunate.

Anhap, unhappiness, misfortune; anhapus, unfortunate, unprosperous.

Anhardd, undecent; anharddwch, undecency.

Anhawdd, anodd, hard, difficult; anhawsder, anodd-did, difficulty.

Anhepgor, necessary, not to be omitted.

Anhun, anhunedd, night-watching, awaking.

Anhwyl, unhealthfulness, sickness; anhwylus, unprosperous, untractable.

Anhy, swil, bashful; anhydyn, untractable, refractory, obstinate, wilful.

Anhirion, unpleasant.

Anial, ynial, forsaken; anialwch, drysni, a desert, a wilderness.

Anian, nature.

Anifail, a beast.

Anllad, lustful, lascivious; anlladrwydd, lust, lasciviousness.

Anllodi, anlloddi, to consume all in eating or drinking.

Anlloedd, riches; anlloeddawg, rich, wealthy.

Anllofi, dylofi, tynu trwy’r llaw, to rid through the hand.

Annawn, misfortune.

Annebre, without return.

Annedwydd, unhappy.

Annedd, an habitation; anneddu, to inhabit.

Anneiryd, irrelevant, impertinent.

Annel, a bending, a stretching; annelu, stretch, bend.

Annel, a prop; a gin or snare.

Anner, anneir, a heifer.

Annerch, commendations, to send commendations.

Anniben, slow, without end; annibendod, slowness.

Annhynghedfen, an unhappy end.

Annien, di-hên, not lively or young.

Annilys, uncertain, doubtful; anilysu, to refuse, to reject.

Annioddef, impatience; anioddefgar, anioddefus, impatient.

Annistaw, not silent.

Anniwair, unclean, lewd, unchaste; aniweirdeb, unchastity,
lasciviousness.

Anniwyg, an ill habit of body; aniwygus, one that has an ill habit of
body.

Annos, hysio, to set a dog upon, or stir him to pursue.

Annosparthus, annosparthol, diwahan, without diversion.

An(n)udd, anhudded, a covering, a shelter; anuddo, anhuddo, to cover.

An(n)un, anhunedd, night-watching, hindrance of sleep.

Annwfn, annwn, a bottomless pit, hell; our antipodes.

Annyled, annyledus, not due or owing.

Anobaith, despair; anobeithio, to despair; anobeithiol, desperate,
without hope.

Anober, anoberi, a trifle, a thing of no value.

Anodd, anhawdd, hard to be done, difficult.

Anoddun, anoddyn, deep.

Anogan, anogawn, without dispraise.

Anogi, to exhort, advise, advertise; annog, an exhortation.

Anogyfarch, without leave.

Anolaith, without moisture, dry; anoleithog, not moist or wet.

Anolo, unprofitable, in vain.

Anorfod, unconquerable, invincible.

Anosteg, talkative.

Anrhaethawl, unspeakable.

Anrhaith, spoil; anrhaith-oddef, he whose goods are confiscated.

Anrhefn, confusion; anrhefnus, out of order, disorderly.

Anrheg, a gift or present; anrhegu, to give presents.

Anrhydedd, honour, reverence; anrhydeddu, to honour, reverence, worship;
anrhydeddus, honourable, reverend.

Anrhyfedd, wonderful.

Ansawd, ansawdd, ansodd, quality, state, condition.

Ansuriaeth, usury.

Anterth, the third hour of the morning, noon.

Antur, scarcely; an attempt, endeavour; anturio, to attempt, endeavour.

Anudon, cam-lw, perjury; anudonwr, a perjurer.

Anurddas, adversity, misfortune.

Anwadal, inconstant; anwadaledd, anwadalwch, inconstancy; anwadalu, to
waver, to change one’s mind.

Anwastad, inconstant, uneven; anwastadrwydd, inconstancy, unevenness.

Anwau, to unweave what hath been woven; anwe, the woof of a web.

Anwes, indulgence, fondness; anwesog, to be of too much fondness.

Anwir, a lie, untruth.

Anwr, one not manly.

Anwybod, ignorance.

Anwyd, coldness, a cold or cough; anwydog, subject to be cold.

Anwyd, anwydau, nature, temper, disposition.

Anŵyl, anhwyl, indisposition of body.

Anŵyl, shameless, bold, impudent.

Anwyl, dear, beloved.

Anwyllyniog, humoursome, cross-grained.

Anymddiried, diffidence, distrust; anymddiriedu, to distrust.

Anynad, peevish, morose.

Anysgog, disigl, immovable; anysgoged, disigldod, immovable.

Anysgymod, discord, disagreeing.

Anyspryd, a ghost, apparition.

Anystywallt, refractory, unstable.

Anyundeb, discord, strife.

Ap, ab, son of.

Aphwys = affwys.

Ar, above, upon.

Ar, on, upon, at, in.

Âr, ploughed land.

Arab, subject to jest; arabedd, arabeddiaith, a merry saying, a jest.

Aradr, arad, a plough; aradrgaeth, tied to the soil, servile.

Araf, slow; arafu, to grow mild, to go slower.

Arail, areilio, to look after, maintain, keep, attend.

Araith, an oration, speech; araithyddiaeth, oratory, rhetoric; areithio,
to make a speech; areithydd, an orator.

Arall, another; arallu, to alter, to amend; aralleg, an allegory,
similitude; arallwlad, a stranger.

Arau, ar y gau, in a lie.

Araul, sunny, serene, calm.

Arawd, an encomium, oration.

Arbed, eiriach, to spare.

Arbennig, principal, capital, chief; arbennig milwyr, the general of an
army.

Arch, a bidding commanding.

Arch, an ark, a coffin.

Arch, chief; archesgob, an archbishop.

Archafael, dyrchafael, ascension, exaltation; archafael, to ascend.

Archen, archenad, apparel, a shoe; archenu, to wear shoes.

Archoll, a wound; archolli, to wound.

Archwaethu, to taste.

Ardal, a march, region; ardalaeth, a marquisate; ardalwr, inhabitant;
ardalydd, a marquis.

Ardeml, an edifice, tabernacle.

Ardwy, defence, protection; ardwyad, a protector, defender; ardwyaw, to
protect, defend.

Ardwyrdaf, _vide_ dwyre.

Ardymyr, ardymer, temperateness, temper, disposition; ardymheru, tymheru,
to temper or moderate; ardymherus, tymherus, temperate, moderate.

Arddamlewychiad, revelation.

Arddelw, to claim, to avouch, to assert, to vindicate.

Ardderchafu, to ascend; ardderchafael, dyrchafael, ascension.

Ardderchog, excellent, high noble; ardderchowgrwydd, excellence,
nobility.

Arddigonedd, too much, superfluity.

Arddu, black.

Arddu, to till the ground; arddiad, ploughed ground, tillage; arddwr, a
ploughman, husbandman; aredig, to plough.

Arddufrych, a dark brown, swarthy.

Arddunaw, to honour, reverence; ardduniant, honour, reverence.

Arddwl = afrddwl, anxious.

Arddwrn, arddwn, the wrist.

Arddwyre, to extol, exalt.

Aren, a rein, a kidney; arennau, reins.

Aren, witty, eloquent.

Arf, a weapon, tool; arfog, armed; arfogaeth, armour; arfogi, to arm, to
harness.

Arfaeth, an intention; arfaethu, to intend.

Arfaidd, bold, daring, an hardy adventure; arfeiddio, to dare.

Arfal, toll for grinding.

Arfedydd, a purpose.

Arfeisio, to pass over water, to wade.

Arfer, custom, common use; arferu, to accustom, to use commonly.

Arfod, the stroke of a weapon, the shot or stroke of a dart; arfodus,
prompt and dexterous at casting a dart.

Arfod, opportunity, season.

Arfoel, bald on the top.

Arfoloch, troublesome, unquiet.

Arfoll, welcome; arfolli, to receive, to welcome, to conceive.

Arfordir, arfordwy, the sea coast.

Arfrwyn, sorrow, pain.

Arffed, a lap; arffedog, yffedog, an apron; an overseer, a guardian.

Argae, a fence to keep water in its own channel, or in mill-dams;
argaedigaeth, a conclusion, bar.

Arganfod, to bewitch, to look upon, to cast an eye.

Argel, retreat, glade, hiding; argelu, to hide, conceal; argelwch, an
hidden thing, a secret.

Argledr, a lord, protector.

Arglwydd, a lord, master; arglwyddes, a lady, mistress; arglwyddiwr, a
governor, lord, ruler; arglwyddiaeth, a lordship.

Argoed, a surrounding wood; argoedwys, woody.

Argoel, a sign, token, omen.

Argrad, glorious.

Argyfrain, feast, obsequies.

Argyfreu, argyffreu, a portion, dowry.

Argyllaeth, a lamenting, a mourning.

Argymhennu, to hold an argument, to argue.

Argys’wy, chastisement.

Argyswr, argyswrw, fear, horror; argysyru, to fear, to be afraid.

Argywedd, a harm, or hurt; an accusation, a complaint; argyweddu, to
hurt, or harm.

Ariad, musicians, pipers, singers.

Arial, lasciviousness, vigour, activity; arialus, full of vigour and
courage, lively, lascivious.

Arian, silver, coin; ariant, money; arian byw, quicksilver; arianllais,
llais arian, a silver sound; ariannog, monied, silvered; ariannu, to
silver.

Arien, dew, hoar-frost.

Aries, prophecy.

Arlafan, enormity, massacre.

Arlain, front rank.

Arlais, the temple of the head.

Arlwy, a preparation; arlwyo, to prepare; arlwyannau, arlwyau,
preparations.

Arllad, oblation, ceremonial wafer, the host; arlladu, to bless; tir
arllad, glebe land.

Arllaw, at hand, near.

Arllawdd, great praise.

Arlloes, arloes, arloesiad, empty, emptied, thoroughly purged; arlloesi,
arloesi, to empty, to purge.

Arllon, very pleasant.

Arllost, the butt-end of a spear, or the stock of a weapon.

Arlluddio, to hinder.

Arllwybr, a foot-step, track of the foot, path.

Armel, second milk.

Armerth, preparation of enterprise.

Armes, a prophecy.

Arnaddu, arnaddudd, arnaddynt, arnynt, upon them.

Arnodd, the plough-beam.

Arodrydd, arawd-rhŷdd, an eloquent oration.

Ar-oddeu, to endure, to bear or suffer.

Arofyn, to enquire, to go a journey.

Arogl, a smell, perfume; arogli, to perfume.

Aroloedd, a covering, shading.

Arorair, an adverb.

Aros, to stay or tarry, to dwell, abide, inhabit.

Aros, scarcely.

Arpar, to provide, to prepare.

Arsang, oppression.

Arswyd, fear, apprehension of fear; arswydo, to fear, to be afraid of.

Artaith, a rending the skin from the bone, a butchery, a quartering;
arteithio, to tear limb from limb, to quarter, to butcher; arteithydd, a
hangman, an executioner.

Arth, a he-bear; arthes, a she-bear.

Aruchedd, the face, the top or uppermost part, a front.

Aruchel, very high, lofty.

Aruthr, wonderful, admirable; aruthredd, a wonder, admiration; aruthrol,
wonderful, admirable.

Arwaesaf, warranty, assistance.

Arwain, to lead.

Arwar, placid, gentle.

Arwedd, to behave or comport one’s self; arweddaid, conversation, manner
of life; arweddawdr, one that carrieth or beareth another.

Arwerthu, to set or offer to sale.

Arwest, cerdd dannau, music.

Arwestr, a purse or satchel-string.

Arwr, a hero; arwaridd, heroic, noble; arwredd, heroism, valour; arwrwas,
a heroic man.

Arwr, a ploughman.

Arwydd, a sign; arwyddfardd, cennad yn gofyn heddwch, neu yn cyhoeddi
rhyfel, an herald at arms denouncing war or peace.

Ar-wydd, a plough.

Arwyl, arwyliant, a funeral.

Arwynebedd, the face, surface, top of a thing.

Arwynt, a sweet smell, odour; arwyntio, to smell pleasantly.

Arwyre, to ascend; arwyrain, a song or praise, hymn.

Arwystl, a pledge, pawn; arwystleiriaeth, a pawning.

Arynaig, fear; aryneigus, fearful.

Asant, a shield.

Asbarn, barn, a judgment.

Asbri, genius, mischief.

Asen, a she-ass.

Asen, a rib.

Aserw, bright, shining.

Aseth, a sharp-pointed lath to fasten thatch to houses.

Asgell, a wing; asgellog, winged; asgellu, to wing, or put on wings;
asgellwynt, a side-wind.

Asgen, hurt, harm.

Asgethrawg, cleft, spiked.

Asglod, asglodyn, ysglodyn, a chip.

Asgre, the bosom, conscience.

Asgwrn, a bone; asgyrnig, asgyrniog, bony, full of bones; asgyrnygu, to
grind and shew one’s teeth by way of chiding or threatening.

Asio, to join or glue together; asiedydd, a joiner.

Astalch, a shield.

Astell, a lath, plank, shelf; astellodi, to cleave, split.

Astrus, dogged, dissatisfied; astrusi, ambiguity, doubt.

Astud, studious, diligent.

Asur, the azure sky, blue.

Asw, aswy, the left.

Aswyn, an excuse, essoin; aswyno, to excuse one’s absence.

Aswyno, abjure, implore; aswyn, a blessing, blessed.

Asyn, the he-ass.

At, to.

Ataenu, brithwlychu, to besprinkle.

Atafaela, to distrain, to attach; atafael, a distraining, an attachment.

Atal, to hinder, to delay, to detain, to stop; withholding or retaining,
an impediment, a stop; atal dywedyd, a stammering, an impediment of
speech.

Atam, atan, atom, to us, towards us.

Atarw, adfwl, a bull half gelt, a steer.

Atcor, a furrow; atcori, to plough furrows.

Atchwaith, sourness, an ill taste, unsavouriness.

Ateb, to answer, an answer.

Ateg, pren cynnal, a prop; ategu, to underprop.

Atethol, an election, choice, picking, or culling.

Atgen y ddaear, the fruit of the earth.

Atglaf, something sickly, relapse; atglefychu, to get a relapse.

Atguddio, to abscond, to hide.

Atgyweirio, to mend, to repair.

Atil, a second conception.

Atoedd, atoeth, perhaps.

Atolwg, beseeching; atolygu, to beseech, implore.

Atorwedd, to lie all along.

Atre, to please, pleasing.

Atref, a wilderness, desert.

Atreg, delay, a delaying, demur.

Atwf, that which grows up after the crop.

Atwyn, to bring or carry back again.

Atychwel, a return.

Athafar, sorrow, grief.

Athaw, silent.

Athraidd, a passing over, or through; athreiddio, to pass over.

Athraw, athro, a teacher, a master; athrawiaeth, doctrine, learning.

Athref, a little dwelling, a mansion-house; athrigiad, an abiding or
staying.

Athrist, very sorrowful or sad.

Athrod, calumny, slander.

Athronddysg, philosophy, doctrine, learning, discipline.

Athrugar, merciful.

Athrylith, disposition, towardness.

Athrywyn, to part those that are fighting, to separate.

Athwll, torn, rent.

Athwyf, euthym aethym, I went.

Au, afu, the liver.

Aur, gold; aurbibau, gold-colour, orpiment; aurdorchog, with a gold
torque; aurych, eurych, a goldsmith, a silversmith, a tinker.

Awch, an edge, vigour.

Awdl, ode, poem.

Awdwr, author.

Aweddwr, clear water, flowing water.

Awel, a breeze, a gale or blast of wind; awelog, windy.

Awen, the gift of poetry; awen-gerdd, a poem well rhymed; awenydd,
gwenydd, the gift of poetry.

Awen, the reins of a bridle.

Awen neu asgwrn grûdd, asgwrn clicied gên, the jaw-bone or cheek-bone;
awenad cernod, a box on the ear.

Awgrym, nod, beck, suggestion.

Awr, an hour; yn awr, now; oriau, hours, prayers; awran, awron, yrwan,
now.

Awst, the month of August.

Awydd, greediness, covetousness; awyddu, to covet or desire greedily;
awyddus, greedy.

Awyr, air.



B.


Ba, Pa, what, what?

Baban, a baby, puppet.

Bacseu, stockings without feet.

Bacwn, bacon.

Bach, little, small.

Bach, a hook, grapling iron; bachiad, crookedness, bending, turning,
winding like a hook; bachog, hooked, full of turnings and windings;
bachu, to hook, to bend.

Bâch, nook, corner, dingle.

Bachgen, a boy.

Bâd, a cock-boat, barge.

Bâd, plague, pestilence.

Baedd, a boar; baedd-gig, brawn; baeddu, to beat, to thump.

Baeol, pail, pot.

Bagad, some, a multitude.

Bagl, a crutch; baglog, crutch like; baglu, to trip.

Bagwnnog, strong, firm.

Bagwy, the point of a weapon, the dart of an arrow; a cluster.

Bangaw, ready, swift, eloquent.

Bangu, hand-bell.

Bai, a fault.

Baich, a burden.

Baidd, a daring, challenge.

Bain, they were.

Bais, a ford, shallows, _pl. of_ bas.

Bâl, tusw, llyweth, a little bundle of flax or the like.

Bâl, peak, point.

Bal, white-faced, gloomy.

Bala, the head of a river flowing out of a lake; wall; hamlet, ruins.

Balaen, balain, balen, steel, iron.

Balaon, bleiddiau, wolves.

Balaw, the tongue of a buckle.

Balc, a balk or ridge between two furrows.

Balch, proud; balchder, balchedd, pride; balchïo, to grow proud.

Baldordd, to prate, prattle, babble; baldorddwr, dwndriwr, a babbler, or
prater.

Balog, flap, pocket, fibula.

Balog (_baculatus_), priest.

Ball, a plague, a pestilence.

Ballasarn, blue.

Ballasg, an hedgehog, an urchin, a porcupine; ballasgog, set with
prickles, prickly.

Balleg, a weal or bow-net to catch fish; ballegrwyd, a fish-net.

Banadl, broom.

Banan, fear.

Banc, bank.

Bancaw, tuft, knot; bancawio, to fasten a hook to an angling line.

Bann, high, tall; baniar (baner), a banner; bannog, noted, notable.

Bann, the arm or stave of a verse.

Banon, a queen.

Banw, porchell, a little pig.

Banyw, banywaidd, feminine.

Bâr, bariaeth, fury, passion; barus, wicked, gluttonous.

Bâr, spear, shaft.

Bara, bread; bara miod, a pancake, fritter.

Baran, strength, force; barannedd, forces, strengths; baranres, the order
of soldiers.

Barcut, barcutan, a kite.

Bardd, a poet; barddas, hanes ar gan, intelligence by verse, a poetical
history; barddoneg, poetry; barddoni, poets; barddoniaeth, the art of
poetry; barddonaidd, poetical.

Barf, a beard; barfog, bearded; barfdrwch, with clipped beard.

Bargen, a bargain, contract.

Bargod, eaves; bargodion, the inhabitants of frontiers or marshes.

Baril, a barrel.

Barn, judgment, sentence; barnu, to judge; barnwr, a judge.

Barr, the bar in a court of judicature; a bar or bolt.

Barr, top, summit.

Barrog, a spur.

Barrug, frost, the time of frost.

Barth, ground, floor.

Barwn, a baron; barwniaeth, power, government, a barony.

Bâs, shallow, ebb.

Bas, swoon, the pouring out of the soul, an ecstasy.

Basgawd, basged, a basket.

Bastardd, a bastard.

Batingo, batio, to pare and burn the soil, to beat.

Bâth, the like, the likeness; arian bâth, coined money; bathu, to coin.

Baw, dirt, dung, a turd; bawai, bawaidd, bawlyd, dirty; bawddyn, a base
dirty fellow; bawedd, mean.

Bawd, thumb.

Bawdd, boddi, a drowning.

Bechan, a little she, a small female; bechanigen, bechan bach, a very
little female.

Bed, as far as, until.

Bedwen, the birch-tree; bedw, birch-trees; bedwenni, birch grove.

Bedydd, baptism; bedyddio, to baptize; bedyddfan, bedyddfaen,
bedyddlestr, bedyddfa, the baptistry, the font.

Bedysawd, the globe of the earth.

Bedd, a sepulchre, grave; beddaid, llonaidbedd, a grave full; beddrawd, a
sepulchre, a burying-place.

Begegyr, a wasp.

Beibl, Bible.

Beichio, to bellow, roar.

Beichiog, laden, with child.

Beidiog, fresh, green.

Beiddio, llesafu, to dare.

Beio, to find fault.

Beirniad, barnwr, a judge.

Beisio, to wade through the water; to make shallow.

Bel, beli, tumult, havoc.

Beili, mound; court-yard.

Bele, a sable whose skin is rich fur, a marten.

Bellach, now at last.

Benbaladr, from end to end.

Benben, together by the ears.

Bendigaid, bendigedig, blessed; bendigo, bendithio, to bless; bendith, a
blessing.

Bendraphen, promiscuously, confusedly.

Benedig, a message, embassy.

Benn, a cart or waggon, a chariot.

Bensach, squinsey.

Benthyg, benffyg, a borrowed thing; benthygio, to borrow.

Benyw, a female kind, a woman.

Bêr, a spit; a spear.

Bera, a heap of corn or hay.

Berf, a verb.

Berfa, a barrow; berfa drol, a wheel-barrow.

Bernais, varnish.

Berr, a short female.

Berr, a leg.

Berth, fair, bright; berthawg, rich, wealthy; berthedd, wealthy, rich;
berthedd, beauty, fairness; berthdud, berth-tûd, a pleasant country;
berthfann, a pleasant place; berthid, berthidau, wealth, riches;
berthogi, to make rich, to grow rich.

Berw, a boiling; berwi, to boil.

Berwr, berw, berwy, cress.

Beryon, berywon, kites.

Bestfil, pryf gormes, a wild beast.

Beth, what, what?

Beudag, the top of the wind-pipe.

Beudy, a cow-house.

Beunoeth, beunos, every night.

Beunydd, bob dydd, daily.

Bi, bydd, fe fydd, it shall be.

Biach, a snipe.

Bicar, bicer, vicar.

Bicre, a conflict, a fight.

Bid, bydded, let it be so, be it so.

Bid a hedge.

Bidog, a hanger, a little sword, a dagger.

Biery, bery, a kite.

Bigwrn, migwrn, a knuckle.

Bilain, a husbandman.

Bilan, a spear, lance.

Bildin, a galling.

Bilwg, bill-hook, an hedge-bill.

Bîr, beer.

Biswail, cow-dung.

Bitail, victuals.

Bitolws, a bull.

Biw, kine.

Blaen, a point, first; blaena, the first; blaeneu, the farthest part of a
country; blaengis, the first assault in battle; blaenor, a ring-leader;
blaenrhed, a fore-runner; blaenu, achub y blaen, to possess before, to go
before; blaenwedd, blaenwel, the very top or height of a thing.

Blagur, twigs, sprigs; blaguro, to sprout, to branch.

Blaidd, a wolf.

Blâs, a taste.

Blawd, meal; blawd-llîf, sawdust.

Blawdd, quick, nimble, swift, active; commotion, tumult.

Blawr, blawrwyn, grey.

Bleddychfa, the face, countenance.

Bleiddiast, bleiddies, a she-wolf.

Blerwm, blatterer, lip sound.

Blew, hair; blewiach, down; blewog, hairy; blewyna, to glean.

Bliant, fine linen.

Blif, a sling, a battering engine to cast darts or stones, catapult.

Blingo, to flay off the skin.

Blîn, weary, troublesome; blinder, weariness tribulation; blino, to
become weary, to vex.

Blisg, shells.

Blith, giving milk; milk.

Blith draphlith, confusedly.

Blochda, cream.

Blodeuyn, a flower, blossom; blodeuog, blossom, flowery.

Blodio, to sprinkle meal; blodiwr, a meal-man; blota, to beg meal.

Bloddest, applause.

Bloedd, shout, cry.

Bloesg, lisping; bloesgni, a lisping, thick utterance.

Bloneg, a swine’s grease; bloneg y derw, the sap of oak-trees; blonhegen,
a swine’s leaf.

Blowmon, a black-a-moor.

Blwch, a box; blychaid, a box-full.

Blwng, angry; blyngawd, angry, hard to be pleased; blynghau, to be angry.

Blwydd, blynedd, blwyddyn, a year.

Blys, longing; blysig, one that longs; blysio, to long for a thing.

Boch, the cheek; bochog, blab-cheeked.

Bochodeg, bychodeg, poor.

Bocsach, a boasting, or bragging.

Bod, to be; essence, being; a mansion, an habitation.

Bod, a kite; bod y gwerni, a buzzard; bod tinwyn, a bald buzzard.

Bodio, to finger, fumble.

Bodron, a kind of flummery.

Bodd, free-will, content; boddhau, to please, give content; boddlawn,
bodlon, contented, willing; boddloni, bodloni, to please, to content.

Boddi, to be drowned, to drown, drowning.

Bodryda, modrydaf, a bee-hive.

Bogail, bogel, the navel.

Boglyn, boss, knot.

Bol, boly, the belly; bola croen, a muzzle; bolchwydd, belly swelling,
pride; bolera, yfed ar ormes, to spunge, or drink without paying;
bolerwr, spunger, parasite; bolgan, a budget; bolwst, the belly-ache.

Bolch, bwlch, a gap, notch.

Bollt, a bolt, a dart; bolltod, the casting of darts or stones out of an
engine.

Boloch, uproar, trouble.

Bon, the stump, or butt-end of a thing; bonclust, a box on the ear;
bondo, the house-eaves; boniad, the hinder part; bonwm, boncyff, a stump
of tree; bonffaglu, to singe; bonllost, shaft, tail.

Bonedd, nobility, gentry.

Bonllef, a shout, a shriek.

Bord, a table, a board; y Ford Gron, the Round Table.

Bore, the morning; boreddydd, the morning; borefwyd, tor cythlwng, a
breakfast; boregwaith, a morning.

Bors, a burst, hernia.

Bôst, a boasting; bostio, to boast.

Botas, spatter-dashes, buttoned hose.

Botwm, a button; botymog, buttoned.

Both, nave of wheel, bottle, boss.

Brac, free, generous, lavish.

Brad, treachery; brad-gyfarfod, a quotidian fever; bradog, false,
traitorous; bradwr, bradychwr, a traitor, a betrayer.

Bradw, worn thin and poor.

Bradwy, a fracture, a rupture, a breach; bradwyog, broken, rent, full of
gaps.

Braen, braenllyd, rotten; braenu, to rot.

Braenar, branar, fallow ground.

Braf, fine, splendid.

Brag, malt; bragod, bragget.

Bragad, progeny, offspring.

Braich, an arm; braicheidio, to embrace; breichrwy, bracelet.

Braidd, near, almost, slight.

Braint, prerogative, dignity.

Braisg, gross, or thick.

Bram, a fart; bremain, to break wind.

Brân, a crow; branos, young crows; branes, brain, crows.

Branar, fallow ground.

Brann, bran.

Bras, big, fat, coarse; braster, fatness, coarseness.

Brat, a clout, or rag.

Brâth, a biting, a stinging, a stab; brathu, to stab, bite, sting.

Brau, rotten, brittle; breuolaeth, breuoledd, breuolder, breuder,
breuawd, brittleness.

Braw, a terror, fright; brawychu, to terrify, vex, move.

Brawd, a brother; brawdoliaeth, brotherhood; brawdgar, a lover of his
brother; brawdgarwch, brotherly love.

Brawd, judgment; brawdwr, a judge; brawdle, a judgment-seat.

Brawddeg, a sentence.

Bre, bryncyn, a little hill.

Breci, brecini, wort, decoction.

Brech, a pox; brech yr Iddewon, leprosy; y frech wen, small-pox; y frech
goch, measles.

Brêch, brych, brindled, brown colour; brecan, a plaid.

Brechdan, bread spread with butter.

Bredych, disloyalty, treachery.

Brefu, to low, or bleat; brefera, to roar, a roaring.

Brêg, a rent, breach.

Breilw, a rose.

Breinrydd, right, immunity, freedom.

Brenin, a king; brenhindy, breuhinllys, a king’s palace; brenhiniaeth, a
kingdom.

Bresych, pot-herbs, a weed in corn; cabbages.

Bretheirio, brytheirio, to belch.

Brethyn, wollen cloth.

Breuad, a worm that eateth the body of the dead, grave worm.

Breuan, a hand-mill; breuan o ymenyn, a print of butter; breuandy, a
mill-house; breuanllif, a mill-stone; breulinaf, malu, to grind.

Breuant, the wind-pipe.

Breunddwyd, a dream; breuddwydio, to dream.

Breyr, brehyr, a baron, lord of a manor; breurdir, the king’s land;
breyres, a baroness.

Bri, esteem, dignity, honour.

Briallu, primroses.

Briduw, the covenant made in baptism, warranty.

Brig, the height or top of anything; brigin, the top of anything, a
branch, sprig; brigog, full of boughs, or branches; briger, the hair of
one’s head; brigladd, to lop.

Brigwn, a rack, andiron.

Bril, a shrimp, a sorry thing.

Brisg, a track.

Brîth, of divers colours, pied; brîth y fuches, wag-tail; brithell yr
ymennydd, the thin skin or film enwrapping the brain; britho, to adorn or
dress anything with divers colours.

Brithog, a fritter, fricassee.

Brithyll, a trout.

Briw, a wound; briwo, to hurt or wound; briw-fwyd, crumbs, or fragments
of bread or any victuals; briwsion, crumbs.

Bro, country, neighbourhood; broaidd, pleasant as a valley.

Broc, roan; wreck.

Brocen, a bosom.

Brôch, anger, wrath; brochi, to wax cruel, hasty, fierce, unruly.

Broch, badger.

Brodio, to embroider.

Brodorion, the same countrymen.

Bron, the breast, the pap, the side or top of a hill; bronddor, a shield;
bronfol, the breast-plate, stomacher; bron-gengl, a poitrel or
breast-leather for a horse; bron-lliain, a stomacher; bron, a
cuttle-fish; brondu’r twynau, the plover; bronwen, a weasel;
bron-rhuddyn, robin goch, robin red-breast.

Browys, brawys, braw, terror.

Bru, the womb.

Brubed, a hand.

Bruchen, the bubbling or springing up of water.

Brud, a prophecy; brudio, to prophesy.

Brwchan, a sort of meat made of oatmeal and water called sowings.

Brwd, warm; brydio, to grow warm; brydaniaeth, warmth.

Brwyd, bodkin, a weaver’s reed, a tent, a frame for embroidery; brwydog,
full of holes.

Brwydr, brwydrin, a skirmish, a fight, a battle.

Brwyn, rushes; brwynen, a rush.

Brwyn, sorrow, mourning.

Brwynaid, smelts.

Brwysg, drunk.

Brycan, a blanket.

Brych, brychau, motes; brycheuyn, a mote; brychni wyneb, the freckles of
the face; brych liw, a dun or brindled colour; brych buwch, the
after-birth; brych cae, a hedge sparrow.

Bryd, an intent or purpose.

Brygowthan, ridiculous talk.

Bryn, a hill; bryncyn, a little hill; Brynaich, Bernicians, Scotchmen.

Brys, haste; brysio, to hasten; brysiawr, one that makes haste.

Brysgyll, a cudgel; a sceptre.

Brytheirio, bretheirio, to belch.

Brython, British, Welsh people; Brythoneg, the British tongue.

Brythwch, tumult, fight.

Bryw, vigorous, lively.

Bu, an ox or cow, a neat; bual, a buffalo or wild ox; buchod, cows;
bugloddi, to tear the earth with horns as bulls use to do; bugunad, the
lowing of an ox; bugad, the bellowing of oxen, cows or bulls; burwy, a
thing to tie up the legs of cows to milk them; buches, a milking place;
bustach, bullock; buch, _pl._ buchod, cows; buswynog, a farrow cow;
buelin, a cup of buffalo horn; buarth, a yard or court for cows; buddel,
the post that cows or oxen are tied to.

Bu, fe fu, there was, he was.

Buad, past event.

Brian, swift.

Buchedd, life, course of life.

Budr, filthy, unclean; budreddi, filth, excrements, dirt; budrog, a slut.

Budd, profit, benefit; buddio, to profit, to benefit; buddfawr,
profitable.

Buddai, budde, a churn.

Buddugawl, victorious; buddugoliaeth, a victory.

Bugail, a shepherd; bugeila, to play the shepherd; bugeilffon, a
shepherd’s crook or staff.

Bugeilrhes, a babble, or prating.

Bul, the bulk of flax seed.

Bûn, a woman, maid.

Buna, a million.

Bur, violence, rage.

Burgyn, carrion, carcase.

Burion, birds of prey, kites.

Burthiaw, to repel or drive back; burthiad, a repulse or putting back.

Bustl, the gall; bustlaidd, bitter.

Bw, terror, fear.

Bwa, a bow.

Bwbach, a bugbear; bwbachu, to frighten.

Bwcl, a clasp or buckle; bwcled, a shield.

Bwch, _pl._ bychod, buck; bychu, gafra, to shock sheaves.

Bwd, booth, hut.

Bwdran, thin flummery.

Bwhwman, to wave or rise in waves.

Bwla, a bull.

Bwlan, a round vessel, made of straw, to keep wool or corn, &c.

Bwlch, a notch or gap.

Bwmbwl, bubble.

Bwn, the bittern.

Bwrdais, a burgess.

Bwrdd, a table, a board.

Bwrlwm, bubble; byrlymu, to bubble, gurgle.

Bwrn, an inclination to vomit.

Bwrw, to cast, to throw, to vomit; bwriad, an intent, or purpose;
bwriadu, to intend, design, or purpose.

Bwth, a cottage.

Bwyaid, eucharist, mass.

Bwyall, bwyell, an axe, hatchet.

Bwyd, meat, victuals; bwyta, to eat; bwyllwrw, provision for a journey.

Bwygilydd, one to the other.

Bwys, hamper, basket.

Bwystfil, a wild beast; bwystgunion, wild beasts.

Bychan, little; bychydig, very little; bychanigyn, a very little thing;
bychodedd, slender means; bychodrwydd, few.

Byd, the world; bydol, worldly.

Bydaf, a bee-hive; bydafu, to hive bees.

Bydwraig, a midwife.

Byddag, snare, noose, knot.

Byddar, deaf; byddaru, to wax deaf, or make deaf.

Byddin, an army; byddino, to exercise soldiers.

Bygwl, threatenings; bygylu, to threaten; bygwth, to threaten,
threatening.

Bynnag, -soever.

Byrnio, to load.

Byrdon, the burden of a song.

Byrdd, byrddau, tables, boards.

Byrhwch, pry llwyd, pry penfrith, a gray brock, or badger.

Byrllysg, a sceptre, a rod.

Byrn, beirn, barnau, judgments.

Byrr, short; byrhau, to shorten.

Bys, a finger.

Bystwn, a whitlow.

Byth, for ever.

Byther, bydder, bydded, let it be.

Bytheiad, a hound.

Bytheirio, bretheirio, to belch.

Byw, to live, alive; bywiol, lively; bywiogrwydd, liveliness; bywyd,
life, livelihood; i’r byw, to the quick.

Bywion, emmets, ants, pismires.



C.


Caban, a cottage, a cabin of a ship.

Cabidwl, chapter, consistory, council-house; cabidyldy, a
convocation-house, chapter-house.

Cabl, cabledd, blasphemy; cablu, to blaspheme; cablus, blasphemous.

Cablyd, dydd Iau Cablyd, Maundy or Shear Thursday.

Cabol, smooth; caboli, to smooth; cabolfaen, a smoothing-stone.

Cabrytai, boor, clown.

Caca, ordure.

Cacen, cake; loose woman.

Cacwn, wasps; cacynen, a wasp.

Câch, a turd, dung, excrements; cachad, a mad foolish doating fellow,
slothful; cachadydd, cachgi, coward.

Câd, a war, battle, fight; cadeithi, wars; cadfa, the field or place
where two armies fight; cad-farch, a war-like horse; cadgno, a sword;
cadell, defence, army; cadeithi, qualities; cadgi, mastiff; cadgyffro,
insurrection; cadlys, a garrison; cadofydd, strategist; cadorfod,
conflict; catrawd, regiment.

Cadach, cader, clout, kerchief.

Cadair, cader, a chair; a strong, or fortified place.

Cadarn, powerful, strong; cadernid, strength, fortitude.

Cadgor, ember—, fast.

Cadit, relic, remainder, trail.

Cadlais, cadlas, a hovel, a back yard for corn ricks or hay.

Cadnaw, cadno, a fox.

Cadr, handsome.

Cadw, to keep, to secure; cadwedigaeth, custody, the keeping; ceidwad, a
keeper; ceidwades, a she-keeper; cadwr, a shield, or buckler, a spear;
cadwyd, it was kept.

Cadwraidd y llaw, the hand from the fingers to the wrist.

Cadwydd, ground full of briars and brambles.

Cadwyn, cadwen, a chain; cadwyno, to chain.

Caddug, mist, fog; caddugo, to grow misty, or foggy.

Cae, a hedge, an enclosure, or field; caead, a cover or lid, also
enclosed or shut; caeor, a sheepfold.

Cae, caell, wreath; caeog, a wreathed one.

Caean, spray, foam.

Cael, caffael, to find, to obtain.

Caen, caenen, a thin rind, peel, or bark, covering, layer.

Caened, white, hoary, aged.

Caer, a round wall as walls of cities; caerau, ceirydd, round walls;
caerog, walled about, damasked.

Caergwydion, Milky Way.

Caeth, captive, narrow, obstructive; caethiwo, to captivate, imprison, or
confine; caethiwed, captivity, bondage, pain, misery.

Cafall, horse, steed.

Cafell, a chancel of a church.

Cafn, a boat, a trough; cafnu, to make hollow like a trough.

Caff, grip, dung-fork; caffio, to clutch, catch at.

Cagal, cagl, sheep or goats’ dung.

Cangell, the chancel of a church; cangellawr, a chancellor, a scribe, a
notary, a secretary; cangelloriaeth, the office of a chancellor,
secretary, or the like.

Cangen, a bough, branch.

Caib, a mattock; ceibio, to dig.

Cail, a sheep-fold.

Caill, _pl._ ceilliau, testicle.

Cain, fair, beautiful, amiable.

Cain, dung-flies.

Caine, a bough of a tree, &c., a lesson in music.

Caint, plain, field, Kent.

Cais, a treasurer; a judge; an endeavour, seeking.

Câl, tree.

Cal, cala, caly, penis.

Calaf, stem, stalk, reed.

Calan, the first day of the year or month; Calanmai, May day; calennig, a
new year’s gift.

Calch, lime, enamel; calchu, to lime, enamel, whitewash; calchiad, the
liming of a thing; calchdo, enamelled armour; calchdoed, wearing armour,
armed.

Caled, hard; caledu, to harden.

Calon, the heart; calondid, magnanimity, courage.

Caluedd, a coach-maker, a wheelwright, a carpenter.

Calyn, canlyn, to follow.

Call, crafty, prudent, witty; callder, calledd, callineb, craftiness,
prudence.

Callestr, a flint-stone.

Callod y coed, fungi of trees.

Callodryn, a reed, the straw or stalk of corn or herbs.

Callawr, callor, a kettle, pan, cauldron, pot, or the like.

Cam, crooked, injury, wrong; camgylus, blameable, guilty; camlwrw, a
penalty, fine, forfeiture; camlyrys, guilty of a fine; camrwysgo, to
usurp; camwedd, cymwedd, wrong, iniquity, sin; camwri, camwy, injury,
affront, abuse.

Cam, step, or pace; camu, to bend, to step; camfa, a stile; camre, step;
camrau, paces, steps.

Camawn, a battle or fight.

Cambost, colan, a prop.

Cameg, camyg, a sturgeon, felly of salmon.

Camel, cawrfarch, a camel; camlad, camlod, hair camlet.

Camin, hawk, falcon.

Camlas, a ditch, a furrow, trench, channel.

Camp, quality, condition, a game; campus, gamesterous.

Camse, chemise, tunic.

Cân, a song, or canticle; canu, to sing, to play music; canu, canuan,
caneuan, caneuen, cân, caniad, a song, a verse, canticle; cantor, a
singer.

Can, 100; candryll, shattered, shivered; canwriad, centurion.

Can, because, by reason, since.

Canaon, canawon, cenawon, cenafon, whelps, puppies.

Canastr, a kind of a limy clay.

Canel, cinnamon.

Canfod, to see, to behold.

Canhiadu, caniadu, caniadhau, to grant.

Canhwynol = cynhwynol.

Canlyn, to follow, to imitate.

Canllaw, the side fence of bridges.

Cann, white; cann gwenith, wheat flour; cann rhyg, rye flour; cannu, to
make white, whiten; cannaid, white; canwelw, white, pale.

Cannerth, aid, assistance.

Canol, the middle; canolig, the midst of a place or thing, medium,
middle-sized.

Canon, canon, rule, song.

Canred, following, pursuing, chasing.

Cànt, a hoop, a rim of a wheel or sieve.

Cànt, 100; cantref, a hundred.

Cànt, he sang or composed.

Canwyll, candle; canwyll llygad, the pupil of the eye; canwyllwr,
canwyllydd, a chandler, a candle-maker; canwyllbren, canwyllyr, a
candlestick.

Canwyr, canwe, a kind of an ear mark for beasts; a joiner’s plane.

Canymdaith, to follow or accompany; canymdoi, to defend, protect or
conduct.

Canys, for, because; cannys, for . . . not.

Capan côr, a bishop’s mitre, a canonical cap.

Capel, chapel; caplan, chaplain.

Capten, a captain.

Car, cer, gar, ger, near to.

Câr, a kinsman; carennydd, ceraint, kin, relation; cares, a kinswoman;
caredig, loving, kind.

Carc, care, anxiety.

Carchar, a prison; carcharu, to imprison.

Cardawd, cerdod, alms or charity; cardota, to beg alms; cardotyn, a
beggar.

Cardd, _pl._ ceirdd, a prisoner; carddu, to imprison.

Carddagl, the hem, border, or fringe of a garment.

Caredd, a sin, crime, or offence.

Caregl, a cup, a chalice.

Carfan, a rail or piece of wood; carfan gwely, a bedstead, or the side of
a bed; carfan gwŷdd, a weaver’s beam.

Cariwrch, a roe-buck.

Carl, a clown, a miser.

Carlam, gallop, bound.

Carn, mere, arrant.

Carlwm, carlwng, stoat.

Carn, a haft, handle, hoof.

Carnedd, carn, a heap of stones.

Carnial, hoof-beating.

Carp, cerpyn, a rag.

Carr, a drag; carraid, a dragload; cargychwyn, a vagabond, a wanderer;
carfil, dray-horse; cargoll, car-lost; carfaglu, to entrap.

Carrai, a thong of leather, &c.

Carreg, a stone; caregos, cerigos, small stones.

Carrog, brook.

Carth, carthion, tow, the worst of hemp or flax.

Carthen, a hair-cloth; sheet.

Carthglwyd, a barrow.

Carthu, to clean stables or cowhouses, &c.

Cartref, a habitation; cartrefu, to dwell, or inhabit.

Caru, to love, to woo; caruaidd, lovely, fair, amiable.

Carw, a deer, a buck; carwfil, carwfarch, cawrfarch, a camel; carwnaid, a
stag’s leap.

Cas, casineb, hatred, envy; cashau, to hate, abhor.

Caseg, a mare; caseg y drycin, the cornish chough, a jay.

Casgl, a collection; casglu, to collect, gather.

Casnod, casnodyn, casnach, lint.

Casnor, malice, envy, an itching anger.

Cast, a little trick.

Castell, a castle; castellu, to encompass round about.

Casul, a cassock, cloak.

Cat, a crumb, or little piece.

Catg—, _vide_ cad.

Cath, a cat; catherig, caterwauling; cathefrach, to irritate.

Cathl, a song, a canticle; cethlydd, a singer, musician.

Cathrain, one that drives the oxen or plough.

Cau, to shut up, to hedge in, to cover; caead, shut or hedged in; cau,
hollow; ceudod, cavity, paunch.

Caul, maw, cheese rennet.

Caw, cawiau, clouts for children.

Cawad, cawod, cafod, a shower.

Cawdel, medley, confusion.

Cawdd, coddiant, offence, wrath, anger; coddi, to provoke, to anger.

Cawell, a basket, a pannier; cradle; quiver.

Cawg, a basin.

Cawl, gruel, pottage; cawla, to beg pottage.

Cawnen, _pl._ cawn, a reed.

Cawr, a giant.

Caws, cheese; cawsa, to beg cheese; cawllestr, cawsellt, a cheese vat.

Cebystr, a halter.

Cecru, ymremial, to scold, quarrel; cecreth, scolding, quarrelling,
strife.

Cecys, cecysen, reeds.

Cêd, profit, gain, benefit; cedawl, beneficial, profitable; cedrwydd,
generous, bountiful, noble, gentle.

Ceden, a nap; cedenog, nappy.

Cedor, pubes.

Cedr, cedrwydd, cedar.

Cefn, the back, ridge of ground; cefnu, to overcome; cefnog, hearty,
courageous; cefnogi, to grow bold, fearless, or strong; cefndedyn,
cyndedyn, cymdedyn, the middle of the bowels and entrails, the double
skin that fastens the back and bowels.

Cefnderw, cefnder, _pl._ cefnderwedd, cefnderoedd, cefnderydd, cefndryd,
first cousin male.

Ceffyl, a horse.

Ceg, the throat; cegu, to swallow greedily; cegrwth, gluttonous.

Cegid, hemlock.

Cegin, a kitchen; ceginwr, a cook.

Cegyrn, _pl._ of cogwrn.

Cengl, a girth, a girdle; cengliadur, clynhiadur, the blades or wheel to
wind thread upon; cenglu, to gird.

Ceibr, bars, rafters, joists.

Ceidron, _pl. of_ cadr, handsome.

Ceifn, ceifn int, a nephew’s nephew, of the fourth degree.

Ceiliog, a cock; ceiliog mwyalch, a blackbird; ceiliog rhedyn, a
grass-hopper.

Ceimliad, traveller, pilgrim.

Ceinach, a hare.

Ceiniad, swift, pliant, subtlety.

Ceiniog, a penny.

Ceinion, _pl._ of cain.

Ceinmyg, ceinfyg, ceinmyged, honour, reverence, esteem, reputation;
ceinmygu, to honour, repute, regard, esteem.

Ceinmyn, a quarrel, combat, duel.

Ceintach, to strive, contend; ceintachus, contentious, quarrelsome.

Ceirch, oats.

Ceirios, cherries.

Ceirniad, a hoofed animal.

Ceirniad, a bugler.

Ceirs, cyrs, corsydd, wettish meadow grounds, moors.

Ceirt, certwyni, carts.

Ceisio, to seek; ceisiad, seeker, lord high treasurer.

Ceispwl, a catchpoll or bailiff.

Ceith, _pl. of_ caeth, captive.

Cêl, concealment, a secret; celc, concealment; celcu, to conceal; celcwr,
one that conceals.

Cèl, cèlws, horse.

Celain, the body of him that was slain; celanedd, a company of dead
bodies.

Celfi, implements or tools; cel fydd, skilful; celfyddyd, an art of
trade.

Celffaint, old rotten timber or wood; celffeinio, to wither, rot, or
decay.

Celi, heaven.

Celu, to conceal.

Celwrn, the milking pail.

Celwydd, a lie; celwyddog, lying.

Celyn, holly; celynog, holly grove.

Cell, a cellar, a buttery.

Celli, a grove of hazel trees; Celliwig, King Arthur’s palace.

Cellaig, a stag.

Cellast, a great bitch; cellgi, a mastiff.

Cellt, flint.

Cellwair, a jest, joke.

Cenau, cenaw, a whelp, a young cub; cenawon, cenafon, whelps, young cubs.

Cenedl, kindred, generation; cenhedlu, to beget; cenhedlawr, the top of a
family; cenhedlig, of the same house or family.

Cenfaint, a herd of swine.

Cenfigen, cynfigen, envy.

Cenhinen, _pl._ cenin, leek; cenhinen Pedr, daffodil.

Cenllysg, hail-stones.

Cenn, hide, scales; cenn pysgod, the scales of fish; cenn y cerrig,
liverwort; marchgen, horse-hide.

Cennad, an ambassador, a messenger, leave or permission; caniatau, to
permit, give leave, or grant; cenadwri, a message.

Cerbyd, a chariot, a coach.

Cerdd, cerddwriaeth, music, songs; cerddor, a musician.

Cerdded, to walk, go; cerddediad, a walking, a going.

Cerddin, criafol, mountain ash.

Cerfyll, a statue.

Cern, a cheek; cernod, a box on the ear; cernodio, to box about the head.

Cerrynt, a course, race, or journey.

Certwyn, a cart.

Certh, wonderful, strange.

Cerwyd, stag.

Cerwyn, a brewing tun, tub.

Cerydd, chastisement, correction; ceryddu, to chastise, correct.

Cesail, the arm-hole, or arm-pit; ceseilwrn, a bundle under the arm.

Cesair, hail-stones.

Cèst, a great belly; cestog, cestor, having a great paunch.

Cetog, bag, basket.

Cetyn, a bit, a while, a short pipe.

Cethern, “teulu uffern,” devils.

Cethin, dark, horrid, terrible.

Cethr, cethren, a nail, a pin; cethrain, to goad; cethrawl, cythrawl,
that which pricks like a pin, borer; nailed, pierced.

Ceubal, a boat, recess, paunch.

Ceubren, a hollow tree.

Ceudod, _vide_ cau.

Ceugant, sure, certain, firm.

Ceulan, hollow bank of river.

Ceuled, the curdle; ceulo, to congeal or wax thick; ceulfraen, crumbly
cheese-curds.

Ceunant, dingle, glen, gorge.

Ci, a dog; ci coeg, ci’r môr, a sea-dog; ciaidd, cruel; cigagl,
dog-daggle.

Cib, cibin, a shell; cibin ŵy, an egg-shell; cibin ŷd, the husks of corn
or flax, &c.

Cicwr, footman, foot soldier.

Cidell, fishing net.

Cidyll, cidyll coch, ceinllyf goch, hawk, kestrel.

Cidwm, a wolf, a rogue; cidymes, a she-wolf, a harlot.

Cidys, faggots.

Cig, flesh; cigog, fleshy; cigcai, to beg flesh; cigwen, cigwain, a flesh
fork; cigydd, a butcher; cigyddio, to butcher, to tear or mangle;
cignoeth, irritable.

Cigfran, a raven.

Cigle, ciglef, I heard; cigleu, be heard.

Cingroen, stinking morel.

Cil, edge, jamb, nook, corner; cilio, to fly, retreat; ciliad, cilydd, he
that putteth to flight, he that flies; cilcwth, a jostle, repulse;
cilcwthio, to drive back or jostle; cilcyn, chip; cilchwyrn, cilchwerryn,
wens or bulks in the skin; cildant, cildannau, the smaller strings of the
harp; cildyn, obstinate, dogged, churlish; cilddant, one of the grinders,
or cheek-teeth; cilddor, a postern; cilfach, a hidden corner; cilwg, a
frown, side look; cilydd, a neighbour, associate.

Cimwch, môrgranc, a lobster, a crab-fish; a crabbed fellow.

Ciniach, lint, a tent for a wound.

Cinionen, a sheet.

Ciniaw, cinio, a dinner; ciniawa, to dine.

Cinyn, a little piece; cinynio, to tear, cut or rend.

Cipio, to snatch; cipiad, a pirate, sea-robber; ciprys, catch as catch
can; cip, snatch, glance.

Cipyll, the stubbles of small wood; a block.

Ciried, alms, mercy.

Cirpyn, cerpyn, a rag.

Cîs, a stroke, stripe, blow.

Cist, a chest, coffer.

Ciwdawd, a nation, a people.

Ciwed, a troop, a multitude, a rabble.

Clâdd, ditch; claddu, to bury; claddedigaeth, burial.

Claear, clauar, luke-warm, milk-warm; claearu, to grow warm.

Claer, clear.

Clâf, sick; clafdy, an hospital; clafychu, to fall sick; clefycian, to be
sickly.

Clafr, clefri, clefryd, leprosy; clafrllyd, leprous, scabby.

Clai, clay; cleio, to bury.

Claig, whirlpool, vortex; cleigio, to immerse.

Clais, the print or mark of a blow; cleisio, to make black and blue spots
in the skin with beating, to break into day.

Clamp, a huge one, a great one.

Clap, a lump; clapiog, lumpy.

Clas, the cloister of a church, area.

Clau, upright, sincere, true to trust; rapid, speedy.

Clawdd, a mud-wall; cloddio, to make a mud-wall.

Clawr, a lid or cover; cloryn, a little lid or cover, a little egg.

Clec, a crack or crackle; clecian, to make a crackling.

Cledr, cledren, the beam or rafter of a house, a sword; cledr y llaw, the
palm of the hand; cledr y ddwyfron, the breast-plate, the breast.

Clêdd, cleddyf, cleddau, a sword; cleddyf bleddyn, cleddau biswail, the
spleen or melt.

Cleddiwig, a quarry of stone, a stone wall.

Clefryd = clafr.

Clefyd, a disease.

Clegr, a rock.

Clegyr, cleger, to cackle, or cry like geese.

Cleinio, to beget, lie down.

Cleirch, cleiriach, a decrepit old man; cleirig, dark, cleric.

Clem, slice; clemio, starve.

Clêr, bards; clêr y dom, the viler, or baser sort of musicians; clerwr, a
bard; clera, going about with music, playing a begging; clermwnt, clerwr,
a musician that begs by playing, a third grade bard.

Clicied, the latch of a door; clicied gên, the jaw-bone.

Climach, a tall wiry man.

Clindarddach, crackling.

Clipan, beggar, vagrant.

Clir, clear, bright.

Clo, a lock; cloi, to lock; cloig, cloigyn, a little lock; cloedigaeth,
conclusion.

Clocian fel ŵy, to cluck like a rotten egg.

Cloc, a clock.

Clôch, a bell; clôch y dwr, a bubble; clôch yr ymadrodd, the top of the
throat; clochydd, a clerk or sexton, a bell-man; clochdy, a steeple;
cloch ia, icicle.

Clôd, clodforedd, praise, recommendation; clodfawr, laudable, excelling
in praise; clodfori, to praise; clodysgain, famed.

Cloer, a little cupboard.

Clofen, a bough, branch.

Clôff, lame; cloffi, to grow lame, to lame; cloffni, lameness.

Clogwyn, a steep rock, a top hanging of one side.

Clogyrnach, rough, stony; the name of one of the 24 metres.

Clol, the skin that covers the skull.

Clôr, clorod, earth-nuts; clora, to gather earth-nuts.

Cloren, the tail of any thing.

Clorian, a balance, weighing scales.

Clos, an enclosure.

Cloyn, boss, stud; cloen ia, icicle.

Clud, cludfa, a carriage; cludo, to carry loadings; cludair, a heap or
pile of wood; cludeino, to pile or heap.

Clugar, a partridge.

Clul, cnul, cnill, a passing-bell.

Clun, the hip.

Clust, the ear; clustymwrando, to listen or hearken.

Clustog, a cushion.

Clwcian, to cluck.

Clwm, cwlm, cwlwm, a knot.

Clwpa, a club.

Clwt, clout, patch.

Clwyd, a hurdle, a stake; clwyd y ddwyfron, the breast-plate; clwyden o
ia, a stake of ice; clwydo, to roost.

Clwyf, a disease; clwyf y brenin, neu ’r maenwnne, the king’s evil; y
clwyf digwydd, y clwyf tegla, y ffeintiadau, the falling evil; clwyfo, to
fall sick.

Clyd, warm; clydwr, clydwch, warmth, comfort.

Clyr, clyryn, a kind of wasps.

Clyw, the hearing, hear thou; clywed, heard, to hear, the hearing;
clywedigaeth, hearing; clywitor, let it be heard.

Cna, cnaf, a knave.

Cnaif, cneifiad, a shearing; cneifio, to shear or clip; cneifion,
sheard-wool.

Cnap hwrrwgr, a hunch or lump; chware cnapan, Welsh hurling.

Cnau, nuts; cneuen, a nut; cnau ffreinig, walnuts.

Cnawd, human flesh; cnawdol, carnal, led by the flesh; cnodig, cnawdus,
fleshy.

Cneb (_cannabis_), hemp.

Cneciaw, to jar, wrangle.

Cnewyll, cnywyll, cnewyllyn, cynhwyllyn, a kernel.

Cnicht, icicle.

Cnif, cniff, toil, pain.

Cnill, clul, a passing-bell.

Cnipws, a clapping or knocking.

Cnîth, a little soft touch; cnithio, to touch gently.

Cnoc, a stroke, a stripe or knock; cnocio, to knock, to beat; cnocell, a
fillip, or flapping the fingers.

Cnoi, to gnaw, chew; cnofa, griping.

Cnu, cnuf, a fleece.

Cnuch, joint, coitus.

Cnud, a flock, a gang.

Cnûl, cnul, a passing-bell, chimes.

Cnuwch, the hair of the head.

Cnwc, a hunch or lump.

Cnwd, a crop; cnydio, to grow, or become a crop.

Cnyw, an autumn-pig; a chap.

Cobio, peck at.

Coch, red; cochi, to wax red, to blush; cochder, cochni, redness; coch yr
wden, hung venison.

Cochl, a cloak, a mantle.

Cochwedd, war.

Côd, a scrip, a satchel; côd urych, a tinker’s budget; coden hyred,
toadstool.

Codi, to rise.

Codwm, a fall.

Codded, wrath, anger, displeasure; coddi, to displease, to wax angry;
coddiant, harm, hurt, offence.

Coddynt, a channel, sink or gutter, a house of office, a common shore.

Coed, a wood; coeden, a tree; coeta, to gather wood; coedwig, a
wilderness; coedgae, park.

Coeg, empty, vain; coegedd, coegni, vanity, vileness, emptiness; coegen,
coegyn, a vain or saucy woman or fellow; coegddall, half blind,
pur-blind; coeg lwybr, an intractable path.

Coel, credit, belief; coelio, to trust, to credit, to believe; coelbren
cwtws, lots; Coelbren y Beirdd, bardic alphabet; coelfain, “stones of
omen,” talisman, joy, joyful news.

Coelcerth, a bonfire.

Coeling, belonging to heaven.

Coes, a leg; coesgoch, red-shank.

Coesed, bara coesed, bara gwyn, white bread.

Coeth, purified; coethi, to make clean, to purify, to hurry about.

Côf, coffadwriaeth, memorial, in memory; cofio, to remember; cofiadur,
cofiawdr, a recorder, a rememberer; cofiain, to call to mind; coffa,
coffhâu, to bring to mind; coffa, coffadwriaeth, memory mention,
memorial.

Cofl, embrace; coflaid, cowlaid, an arm-full; cofleidio, cowleidio, to
embrace.

Coffr, cist, a chest.

Côg, cŵg, a cook; coginiaeth, cwginiaeth, cookery.

Côg, a cuckoo; cogfran, a rook.

Cogail, truncheon, distaff.

Cogio, to cheat.

Cogor, to prattle, to chatter.

Cogwrn, a knob, a knuckle; cogwrn o yd, a stalk of corn.

Congl, a corner; conglfaen, a corner-stone.

Col, the beard of barley-corn; point, peak, hillock; coliog, full of
little beards of barley-corn.

Coler, a band.

Colofn, a pillar.

Colomen, a dove, a pigeon; colomendy, a dove-house.

Colp, stake, dart, dibble.

Cols, beheading; gwyl Ieuan y Cols, feast of Decollation of John (Aug.
24th).

Coludd, coluddion, guts.

Coluro, to paint, varnish.

Colwyn, a shock-dog.

Colwynwraig, a midwife; colwyno, to play the midwife.

Colyn, a sting, a hinge.

Coll, colled, loss; colledu, to lose, bring to loss; colledigaeth,
perdition, destruction, execution; colli, to lose, to spill.

Coll, cyll, hazel-trees; collen, a hazel-tree; collwyn, a grove of
hazel-trees.

Combr, fine linen, cambric.

Compod, compass.

Coned, pride; coniach, proud.

Conell, a tail, a sting; conyn, a sting.

Cono, a fellow, chap.

Conyn, stalk, stem, point.

Copa, the top of any thing; copog, with a large top.

Copyn, pryf copyn, a spider.

Côr eglwys, cafell, a choir; côr gwartheg, a cow-house.

Corf, saddle, pommel.

Corf, corff, body.

Corodyn, a mate, fellow-traveller.

Corawg, generous, liberal.

Cordwal, Cordovan leather.

Corddi, to churn.

Corelwi, to dance, reel.

Cored, a weir, dam.

Corlan, a sheep fold, a sheep pen.

Corn, a horn.

Cornel, a corner.

Cornicyll, cornchwigl, corner y gwaenydd, cornchwiglen, a lapwing.

Corner, cornol, a leader, colonel.

Cornwyd, plague, pestilence, ulcer.

Coron, a crown; coroni, to crown.

Corr, a dwarf; corbedw, corbedwyn, low or little birch-trees; corddyn, a
pigmy; cordref, a little village; corhwyad, a teal, or little wild duck;
cor-iar, a partridge; corgi, a cur; cordderw, the low, short oak-trees;
corddyn, a hinge of a door; cornant, a little brook.

Cors, marsh; corsog, moorish, fenny, also full of reeds; corsfrwynen,
llafrwynen, a bulrush; cors-hwyad, a fen-duck, a moor-duck.

Cors, corsen, a reed; ceirs, cyrs, reeds.

Corwgl, cwrwgl, corwg, a fisher’s boat made of a horse-hide and twigs.

Corwynt, gorwynt, a whirlwind.

Coryn, the crown of the head or hat; corynrwy, a diadem.

Cosi, to scratch; cosi, y rymgrafu, the itch.

Cosp, cospedigaeth, punishment; cospi, to punish; cospedigaeth,
punishment.

Côst, expense, charges; costus, costly.

Costog, a mastiff, a cur-dog; costogaidd, churlish, dogged; costoglwyth,
a plebeian tribe.

Costrel, a great flagon, a jug, a bottle.

Costwyo, cystwyo, to chastise.

Cosyn, a cheese.

Cot, coth, an old man, a rich man.

Cotarmur, pais yr Arwyddfardd, a coat of arms.

Cotwm, cotton.

Cowraint, cywraint, skilful, ingenious.

Cowyll, maiden fee.

Cowyllyn, a monk’s cowl, or short mantle.

Cowydd, cywydd, a song, a verse of seven syllables; cowydd marwnad, an
elegy.

Cowyn, plague, pestilence, murrain.

Crach, scabs.

Crafanc, the claw of a bird, a crab, or any such thing, a broad hand, a
paw; crafangog, clawy, broad-handed, with great paws; crafangaid, a
handful, a pawful.

Crafu, to scratch, to scrape; crafell, a curry-comb, a wooden slice to
turn out cakes with; crafell yr ysgwydd, the shoulder blade; craflech, a
stone for scraping.

Craff, a pair of pincers; creffyn, a brace to fasten a thing with.

Craff, sharp-sighted; craffu, to look steadfastly.

Cragen, crogen, a shell.

Crai, new, fresh, vivid.

Crai, craidd, middle, heart.

Craiff, merciful.

Craig, a rock.

Crain, cast down or prostrate.

Crair, creirwy, the relics the swearer lays his hand on to take his oath;
creirio, to swear or make an oath.

Craith, a scar; craith ogyfarch, a visible scar.

Cramwyth, crempogen, a fritter, a pancake.

Cranc, a crab fish.

Crap, a snatch, an endeavour.

Cras, dry and hard, well baked, saucy; crasder, dryness, sauciness;
crasu, to wax dry and hard.

Crathell, _pl._ crethyll, stickleback.

Crau, gore, blood; creudo, creudwysg, creudde, creugar, creulyd, gory;
creulan, bloody field; creulanw, flow of blood; creulawn, bloody, cruel.

Crau nodwydd, the eye of a needle.

Craw, a swine-sty.

Crawel, berries, red berries.

Crawen, a crust; crawennu, to wax hard, or crusty.

Crawn, collection, a gathering, pus; crawnu, to gather to a head.

Crebach, which is shrunk, or withered; crebychu, to shrink or wither.

Crecian, to cackle as a hen.

Crech, crych, curled, frizzled.

Crechwen, a loud laughter; crechwenu, to laugh loudly.

Cred, faith, troth, Christendom; credu, to believe; credadun, crededyn, a
believer; creduniaeth, credaduniaeth, belief; credo, creed; credofydd,
giver of faith.

Credd, temper, disposition.

Crefadur, the outer membrane of the brain.

Crefu, to beg earnestly.

Crefydd, religion; crefyddu, to serve God; crefyddus, crefyddgar,
religious; crefyddwr, a religious man.

Crefft, a handicraft, trade; crefftwr, a mechanic, or working tradesman;
crefftwraidd, artificial.

Cregen, an earthen vessel; cregenydd, crochenydd, a potter.

Cregen, a hoarse language.

Creglais, a hoarse screaming noise; cregyr, screamer, heron.

Creifiant, mercy, forgiveness.

Creinio, to creep, grovel.

Crempog, crempogen, a pancake, or fritter.

Cren, a sty, pen, coop.

Crepa, a short man, a dwarf; crepog, a short dwarf woman; crepach,
withered, shrunk.

Crest, cresten, a scurf, dandruff; crestennu, crestio, to gather scurf,
to become scurfy or scabby.

Creth, achreth, cold shaking or trembling.

Creu, to create; creawdwr, a creator; creadur, a creature.

Creu, crefu, to crave or beg earnestly.

Creu-, _vide_ crau.

Creuan, the brain-pan, the skull.

Crewyn, a swine sty.

Creyr, cryr, heron, crane.

Cri = crai; bara cri, unleavened bread.

Cri, a crying out; crio, to cry or bawl out.

Criafol, service-berry; criafolen, criolen, service tree, mountain ash.

Crîb, a comb; cribo, to comb; cribell, the comb of a cock or bird;
cribin, a rake; cribinio, to rake; cribog, which hath a comb.

Cribddail, a rape, a ravishment, an encroachment; cribddeilio, to commit
a rape, to encroach; cribddeiliwr, a robber, an extortioner, an
encroacher.

Cricied, cricket.

Crigl, criglyn, trace, mark.

Crimell, crimp, min, the edge or point of anything; crimog, a shin;
crimprew, sharp ice.

Crin, brittle, rotten; crinder, brittleness, rottenness; crino, to wax
brittle, or rotten.

Crintach, niggard, covetous; crintachrwydd, niggardness, covetousness;
crinwas, a covetous sordid man.

Cripio, to scratch.

Crisial, crisiant, crystal.

Croch, vehement, violent, loud.

Crochan, crochon, a pot; crochenydd, crochanwr, a potter.

Croen, a skin; croenen, a thin skin; croeni, to skin.

Croes, a cross; croesi, to cross; croes naid, cross of refuge, the part
of the true Cross once among the regalia of Wales; croesanaeth, a bawdy
discourse; croesanair, a wrongful defamation; croesangerdd, lewd songs,
scurrilous verses, a carping song.

Croesaw, welcome; croesawu, to welcome, or to make welcome.

Croew, sweet, fresh, clear in speech; croewber, sweet, mellow; croewder,
sweetness without saltness or sourness.

Crôg, a cross, hanging; crogi, to hang; Croglith, the service of the
cross; crogbren, crogwydd, a gallows, a gibbet; croglath, snare, noose.

Crogen, a sea-shell, fish-shell, the gills of fish.

Cronglwyd, the roof of a house.

Crombil, cropa, the crop or gorge of a bird.

Cromlech, cavern, cromlech.

Cromwyth, a shin.

Cronell pysgod, the spawn of fishes, the roe of fishes.

Cronicl, a chronicle.

Cronni, to dam up water.

Cropa, the crop or gorge of a bird.

Cropian, to creep, to go on hands and knees.

Crôth, a womb, abdomen; croth coes, the calf of a leg; crothog, with
thick calves.

Crowyn, sty, paunch.

Crud, a cradle.

Crugyn, a heap, pimple; crugo, to heap up; cruglwyth, a heap.

Crupl, a cripple.

Crwban, a sea-crab, lobster.

Crwca, bent, crooked.

Crwm, cram, crooked, bent, concave.

Crwnn, round.

Crwth, a box, a musical instrument, a crowd; crwthor, crythor, he that
plays on a crowd.

Crwybr, the dregs of any thing; honey-comb; hoarfrost.

Crwydr, a wanderer, or vagabond; crwydro, to err, or go astray, to
wander; crwydrad, a vagabond; crwydri, poverty, want, penury,
covetousness; crwydrus, poor, needy, covetous.

Crwys, a cross; crwysedd, contention, debate.

Crybach, a hook, a bent thing.

Crybwyll, to make mention, to declare.

Crych, curled; crychni, a curl; crychu, to curl.

Cryd, tremor, trembling, ague; crydwst, ague, fear.

Crydr, a weapon of defence.

Crydd, a shoe-maker; crydd-dy, the shoe-maker’s house or shop;
cryddiaeth, cryddaniaeth, cryddyddiaeth, the art of shoe-making.

Cryf, strong; cryfder, strength; cryfhau, to strengthen, to gather
strength.

Cryg, hoarse; crygi, crygni, hoarseness; crygni, to grow hoarse.

Cryman, a reaping-hook.

Crymu, to bend, to grow crooked.

Cryn, indifferent, medium, tolerable.

Crynder, roundness.

Cryno, compact; crynodeb, compactness; crynhoi, to make compact.

Crynog, 8 bushels, quarter.

Crynnu, to shake, tremble; crynnwr, a quaker.

Crynwraidd, ignoble, ungenteel, rustic.

Crŷr, cryhŷr, crehŷr, y crŷr glâs, y crŷr llwyd, heron, crane.

Crys, cryswyn, a shirt, tunic.

Crysio, to hasten or ride away.

Cryw, a coulter, basket for fishing, net.

Crywyn, a hog-sty.

Cu, cuas, dear, or well-beloved.

Cuall, stupid, fierce.

Cucwy, an egg-shell.

Cucyn, a joint.

Cuch, cuwch, a frown; cuchio, to frown; cuchiog, grim.

Cud, a kite; cudyll, kestrel.

Cudyn, a lock of hair, or wool.

Cudd, a hiding, a concealing; cuddfa, a lurking-place, a place to hide
in; cuddio, to hide, to conceal.

Cuddan, cuddon, a wild pigeon.

Cuddigl, cufigl, a bed-chamber.

Cuell, a blockhead; stupid, fierce.

Cuert, cufert, a lid, covering, covert.

Cufigl, a bed-chamber.

Cufydd, a cubit.

Cul, lean, narrow; culhau, to wax lean or narrow.

Culwydd, culwyf, ruler.

Cun, cuniad, a lord.

Cun, dear, attractive, kind.

Cunar, a sow.

Cunnach, jack, a flaggon, a bottle.

Cunnallt, arms or weapons.

Cunnog, a small milking-pail.

Cur, a stroke, or affliction; curo, to beat, to knock; curfa, a beating.

Curan, a boot; curannau, boots.

Curas, a coat of mail, a weather-board.

Curio, to pine or waste away; curog, wasted.

Curnen, a spire, a rick of corn or hay.

Curt, a heap or rick, a cock of hay or corn.

Cûs, cusan, a kiss; cusanu, to kiss.

Cust, film, thin covering.

Cut, hut, hovel, sty.

Cuwch, a frown.

Cw, whence.

Cwan, owl; to hoot.

Cwaran, a shoe.

Cwbl, the whole, all; cwblhau, to perform, to fulfil, to complete.

Cwcwallt, a cuckold.

Cwcwll, bwd neu fantell a wisgo offeiriad o hen ffydd, the hood of a
Catholic priest; cowl, hood.

Cwch, a cock-boat; cwch gwenyn, a bee-hive.

Cwd, a bag.

Cwdd, where, whither.

Cwddu, to dig, raise, shelter.

Cweryl, a dispute, quarrel.

Cwfaint, a convent.

Cwfert, a cover or lid.

Cwfl, cowl, hood.

Cwgn, a joint, or knuckle; cygnog, full of joints, having great joints.

Cwhwfan, to wave, heave, float.

Cŵl, a fault, a sin; cylus, faulty.

Cwlio, to separate good from bad, to pick and cull; cwliedig, culled or
picked, cwla, sorry, mean, inconsderable; cwlin, refuse.

Cwlas, a bay of building.

Cwlen, a hat.

Cwlis, a portcullis.

Cwlm, clwm, cwlwm, a knot or tie.

Cwll, cylla, the paunch of the belly, also the stomach.

Cwlltr, a coulter.

Cwm, a dale, a valley between hills.

Cwman, a vat, a churn; rump, lower part of the back.

Cwmpas, a circle, a pair of compasses.

Cwmplin, compline.

Cwmwd, a hundred.

Cwmwl, a cloud; cymylog, cloudy.

Cî, cwn, a dog, dogs.

Cwndid, a song, a tune.

Cwndid, conduct, escort, conduit.

Cwning, cwningod, rabbits.

Cwnnu, to rise, to begin to stir.

Cwnsallt, pais yr arwyddfarch, a coat-armour, a coat of arms.

Cwnsli, advice, counsel, council.

Cwnsillt, anvil.

Cwpan, a cup.

Cwrel, coral.

Cwpl, couple, couple of roof; cyplysu, to join or couple together.

Cwrlid, a coverlet.

Cwrnad, a hubbub.

Cwrr, edge, border.

Cwrian, to cower, squat.

Cwrs, a course, method, order.

Cwrser, courser.

Cwrt, court, enclosure.

Cwrsi, cap lliain merch, a coif; cwrsi llaw, a handkerchief.

Cwrw, cwrwf, ale.

Cwrwgl, a fisher’s boat made twigs and a horse-hide.

Cwrwm, bend, stoop.

Cwsg, a sleep.

Cwst, toil, drudgery.

Cwstart, custard.

Cwt, cut, cottage; cwt môch, a hogs’ sty.

Cwt, a crumb; cwta, bobtailed, short, snappish; cwtws, lot.

Cwthr, rectum, anus.

Cwybyr, crwybr, honey-dregs, honey-comb.

Cwyddo, to fall; cwyddog, ready to fall.

Cwymp, a fall; cwympo, to fall; cwympod, a downfall, a descent.

Cwyn, cywynnu, to arise, to begin to stir.

Cŵyn, a complaint, lamentation, an action, cause, accusation, a process;
cwyno, to commence a suit of law, to complain; cwynfan, cwynofain, to
lament, grieve, complain; cwynfanus, groaning, grieving, complaining.

Cwynos, a supper.

Cŵyr, wax; cwyro, to wax; cwyraidd, waxen, soft.

Cŵys, a furrow; cwyso, to furrow, to plough.

Cybydd, a covetous man; cybyddu, to covet; cybydd-dod, covetousness.

Cychwardd, to laugh or smile.

Cychwedl, cyd-chwedl, a discourse, a narration, tale.

Cychwîor, equal.

Cychwyn, to begin, to set out.

Cyd, common; tir cyd, common land; ynghyd, together; gyd â, gyda,
together with, with; i gyd, all together; cyd-, com-, fellow-;
cyd-wladwr, compatriot, fellow-countryman; cydio, to join, or couple
together; cydawr, a conclamation, united shout.

Cyd, cyhyd, as long.

Cydcam, to play, to jest, to mock.

Cydcnawd, copulation.

Cydfod, to agree together.

Cydcerdd, symphony, concert in music.

Cydradd, equal, of the same degree or dignity.

Cydrychiol, present, or before the face; cydrycholder, presence.

Cydstad, as good.

Cydsynio, to consent.

Cydwybod, conscience.

Cydymaith, a companion; cydymeithion, cymdeithion, play-fellows,
companions; cymdeithas, fellowship.

Cydwedd, joined in life, as man and wife; cydweddu, to join in life, as
man and wife.

Cydwledd, a joint feast, banquet.

Cydŵr, a partner.

Cyf-, com-.

Cyfa, whole; cyfan, all; cyfanu, to make whole.

Cyfaddawd, a league, a covenant.

Cyfaddas, fit, convenient.

Cyfaddef, to confess.

Cyfaenad, assembly, association.

Cyfaill, cyfaillt, a friend; cyfeillach, friendship.

Cyfair, cyfer, direction; ar gyfair, ar gyfer, opposite.

Cyfalhau, cyhafalhau, cyfallu, to liken, compare, resemble.

Cyfallwy, whole, efficient.

Cyfamod, covenant.

Cyfamser, the mean time, the mean while, the interim of time.

Cyfamug, to defend.

Cyfannedd, a dwelling-place, habitation; cyfaneddrwydd, sociableness,
mirth; cyfaneddu, to dwell or inhabit.

Cyfansodd, a composition; cyfansoddi, to compose, or compile.

Cyfar, cyfariaeth, ploughing, or tilling together, co-aration; cyfaru, to
plough together.

Cyfarch, to request, accost; cyfarch gwell, to salute, greet.

Cyfarchafael, cyrchafael, dyrchafael, ascension.

Cyfarchwel, devotion, prayer, petition; a prison.

Cyfaredd, enchantment, witchcraft; cyfareddu, to enchant, bewitch.

Cyfarfod, to meet, a meeting.

Cyfariaith, conversation.

Cyfarlludd, hindrance.

Cyfaros, to stay, wait, a staying; cyfarosau, delays.

Cyfarpar, a preparation; cyfarparu, to prepare.

Cyfarsagu, to crush, vanquish.

Cyfartal, equal, as good; cyfartalu, to make equal, to proportion;
cyfartalwch, cyfartalrwydd, proportion, propriety.

Cyfarth, to bark, yelp.

Cyfarthelid, constant.

Cyfarwar, consonant, meet, agreeable, social, civilized.

Cyfarwas, strife, debate, disputation.

Cyfarwydd, skilful, expert; pry’r gyfarwydd, the glow-worm; cyfarwyddyd,
skill, experience; cyfarwyddo, to direct, instruct; cyfarwyddwr, a guide,
a director, an instructor.

Cyfarwyneb, opposite, on the other hand.

Cyfarwyre, to arise, to ascend, exalt, to praise.

Cyfarwys, a gift, oblation.

Cyfarystlys, on the side, sideways.

Cyfatgen, a proverb.

Cyfathrach, affinity, kindred.

Cyfebr, cyfeb, to be with young, used of beasts; cyfebru, cyfebu, to
conceive.

Cyfedliw, reproach, to upbraid.

Cyfedd, a feast, a banquet; cyfeddach, a banqueting, feasting.

Cyfegydd, pickaxe.

Cyfeiedd, cyfeiaeth, trouble, want or necessity.

Cyfeiliorn, astray, cyfeiliorni, to go astray.

Cyfeirio, to direct, guide, refer.

Cyfeisor, second, alike; mate.

Cyfeistedd, a seat, to sit together.

Cyfelin, a cubit.

Cyfenw, a surname; cyfenwi, to surname.

Cyfer, over against, opposite; cyferbyn, over against; cyferbyniad,
opposition.

Cyfer, an acre.

Cyferchydd, a saluter, one that greets or bids good-morrow.

Cyfergyr, right against.

Cyferig, to be with young.

Cyferthi, beauty, holiness, purity.

Cyferwyr, iniquity.

Cyferyw, he met.

Cyfesgar, an adversary, an enemy; having common enemies.

Cyfieuaeth, a derivation of words, a conjugation.

Cyfewin, having complete nails.

Cyfhau, to make whole.

Cyfiaith, of the same language, vernacular; cyfieithu, to interpret or
translate, cyfieithydd, an interpreter, translator.

Cyfiaw, to make equal.

Cyfiawn, just, upright; cyfiawni, to rectify, to justify; cyfiawnhau, to
justify; cyfiawnder, justice.

Cyfladd, fit, meet, convenient, mutually killing; to fit, to clash.

Cyflafan, outrage, crime, slaughter, massacre.

Cyflafar, harmonious; cyflafaredd, a meeting to make peace.

Cyflaith, toffy.

Cyflawn, full, complete; cyflawni, to fulfil; cyflawnder, fulness.

Cyfle, opportunity, convenience; cyfleu, to place, to set a thing in its
place, to regulate.

Cyfled, as broad, of equal breadth; cyfledu, to make of equal breadth.

Cyflegr, guns.

Cyfleusdra, convenience, opportunity.

Cyfliw, of the same colour.

Cyflo, with calf; cyfloi, to take bull, or become with calf.

Cyflog, wages, reward; cyflogi, to hire; cyflogawd, cyflog, wages, hire.

Cyfludwo, to reduce to ashes.

Cyfludd, to encumber, hinder, disturb; digyfludd, free from all
encumbrances.

Cyfluydd, an army, united host.

Cyflwg, clear, visible; twilight.

Cyflwr, condition, constitution.

Cyflwydd, prosperity.

Cyflwyn, a present given; cyflwyno, to present.

Cyflychwyr, dusk.

Cyflnedd, army, war.

Cyflym, swift, nimble.

Cyfnerth, support, strength.

Cyfnesaf, next of kin.

Cyfnewid, a change, or exchange; cyfnewidwriaeth, an exchange of one for
another; cyfnewidio, to exchange; cyfnewidiau, changes.

Cyfnifer, cynifer, as many, even; cyfniferawg, of an even number.

Cyfnither the first cousin female.

Cyfnod, the time appointed.

Cyfod, a rise; cyfodi, to arise.

Cyfoed, cywoed, of the same age.

Cyfoeth, cywaeth, territory, dominion, power, riches, wealth; cyfoethog,
rich, wealthy; cyfoethogi, to enrich, to grow wealthy; cyfoethogrwydd,
wealth, riches.

Cyfog, cyfogiad, vomiting; cyfogi, to vomit.

Cyfolwch, praise, commendation.

Cyfor, brim, border, flock, host; cyforiog, overflowing, cyforio, to fill
full.

Cyfraid, cyfreidiau, necessaries.

Cyfrain, cywrain, skilful, ingenious.

Cyfraith, law; cyfreithio, to go to law; cyfreithiwr, a lawyer.

Cyfran, an equal share; cyfrannu, to divide equally or justly; cyfrannog,
to partake, have a share.

Cyfranc, a battle, a conflict, a skirmish, an adventure.

Cyfrben, perfect, complete.

Cyfrdan, dissention.

Cyfrdelid, elegant, beautiful.

Cyfrdo, neat, tight.

Cyfrdost, very sharp, vehement.

Cyfrdrist, very sad, heavy, mournful.

Cyfref, as thick, as big.

Cyfreiau, chains, leashes.

Cyfreu, a dowry, portion.

Cyfred, as swift, concurrent.

Cyfrestru, to tie, or knit.

Cyfrgain, very fair, beautiful.

Cyfrgoli, lost, utter perdition; cyfrgolli, to perish, to be lost.

Cyfrif, a number, a computation, accounts; cyfrif, to number, compute, to
cast accounts; cyfrifol, of good esteem or reputation.

Cyfrin, secret, a secret; cyfrinach, a secrecy; cyfrinachol, in secret,
cyfrinachu, to talk of secret things, to conceal.

Cyfrodedd, cyfrodeddig, twisted together, twined; cyfrodeddu, to twine,
twist.

Cyfrwch, to meet, a meeting.

Cyfrwng, the middle; cyfryngwr, a mediator, an intercessor; cyfryngu, to
mediate, intercede.

Cyfrwy, a saddle; cyfrwyo, to saddle a horse.

Cyfrwydd, expedite, prosperous; cyfrwyddo, to direct, or instruct.

Cyfrwys, trained, cunning, subtle; cyfrwyso, to grow crafty, or cunning,
cyfrwysder, cyfrwysdra, cunningness, craftiness.

Cyfrysedd, discord, strife.

Cyfryw, such, alike.

Cyfuch, cyfuwch, as high.

Cyfun, united agreeable; cyfundeb, concord, unity, cyfundawd, concord.

Cyfurdd, equal, of the same degree; cyfurddawr, honorable, of the highest
order.

Cyfwlch, convenient, fit; cyfylchig, horned.

Cyfwng, a separation.

Cyfwrdd, cyhwrdd, cyffwrdd, to touch, to meet together.

Cyfwyrain to rise, ascend.

Cyfyng, narrow, strait; cyfyngu, to straiten or make narrow; cyfyngder,
narrowness, closeness.

Cyfyl, nigh, near; cyfylfin beak to beak.

Cyfyrder, cyfyrderw, _pl._ cyfyrdyr, second cousin male.

Cyfys, devouring, ravenous.

Cyfysgar, cyfesgar, an enemy, an adversary.

Cyfystrawd, saddle.

Cyfystred, neighbourhood.

Cyff, the trunk of a tree.

Cyffeithio, to tan, dress.

Cyffelyb, similar; cyffelybiaeth, a similitude or likeness; cyffelybu, to
liken or compare.

Cyffes, a confession; cyffesu, to confess.

Cyffin, a confine, frontier; cyffinydd, marcher.

Cyffio, to numb.

Cyffniden, a spider.

Cyffoden, a concubine, a harlot.

Cyffred, to embrace, to contain; comprehension, reason, cause.

Cyffreu, a dowry.

Cyffro, a stir, a commotion; cyffroi, to move, to disturb.

Cyffwrdd, cyhwrdd, to touch.

Cyffylog, a woodcock.

Cyffur, cyffuriau, tools or instruments, ingredients, compounds,
medicines.

Cygwn, cwgn, a knuckle.

Cyngaf, caci-mwci, burdock; cynghafog, like a bur.

Cyngan, a speech; cynganu, cynanu, siarad, to speak; cynghanedd, harmony,
concert, alliteration; cynghaneddu, to alliterate, harmonize;
cynghaneddol, harmonious, alliterative.

Cynghaws, cynghawsedd, a cause, a law-suit, an accusation, a process.

Cynghellawr, a chancellor.

Cyngherth, overhanging, impending, dreadful.

Cynghorfynt, envy, hatred; cynghorfyrnnu, to envy, to emulate;
cynghorfynnus, envious.

Cyngor, a counsel, advice; cynghori, to counsel, advise, exhort.

Cyngrabad, happiness, good fortune.

Cyngraff, visible.

Cyngrair, a league, a covenant.

Cyngres, rank, row, union.

Cyngrod, a winding reel.

Cyngroesfforedd, croesffordd, a place where two ways meet.

Cyngrwn, crwn, round.

Cyngwarchadw, preoccupancy.

Cyngweiniant, infirmity, weakness; contrition, remorse.

Cyngwl, the first sin, the first sinner.

Cyngwystl, a pledge, a pawn.

Cyngyd, intention, delay; cyngydio, to intend, hesitate, to delay.

Cyngyr, cynghorion, counsels, advices.

Cyhafal, cyhefelydd, very like, in all things alike; cyhafalhau,
cyfalhau, to liken, to resemble.

Cyhoedd, cyhedd, public, open; cyhoeddi, to publish.

Cyhudded, accusation; cyhuddo, to accuse, impeach.

Cyhwfan, to wave, heave, hover.

Cyhwng, cyfwng, a separation.

Cyhwrdd, cywrdd, cwrdd, cyffwrdd, to touch, to meet.

Cyhyd, cyd, as long, of equal length; cyhydedd, of equal longitude,
equinoctial, twisted together; cyhydu, cyhydeddu, to make of the same
length, to twist together.

Cyhydreg, to encounter, contend.

Cŷl, cylyn, kiln, furnace.

Cyhyr, a muscle, a flesh-fly; cyhyraeth, muscular system, skeleton,
apparition; cyhyrwaew, myalgia.

Cylafaredd, cyflafaredd, communication; cylafareddu, to communicate;
cylafareddwr, a peace-maker, a reconciler, a communicator.

Cylch, round about, a hoop; cylchu, to hoop; cylched, cylchedd, circuit,
circumference; cylchwy, a round buckler; cylchwyl, anniversary; cylchyn,
circlet.

Cylionen, _pl._ cylion, a fly, a gnat; cylion paradwys, math ar chwilod
disglaer fel aur, sy’n magu mewn pren on, ac a arferir i godi twnn croen
neu chwysigennau, blister flies.

Cylmael, forehead; wreath.

Cylus, culpable, blameable.

Cyll, hazel-trees.

Cylla, the stomach; cyllagwst, stomach ache.

Cyllaeth, pain, grief, sorrow, torment.

Cyllaig, a deer.

Cyllell, a knife.

Cyllestrig, cyllestrigfawl, flinty.

Cyllid, a return, tax, revenue; cyllidog, prosperous; cyllidus, geldable.

Cymaethlu, a family.

Cymaint, cymain, so many, so much, as much, so great.

Cymal, a joint; cymalog, full of joints; cymalu, to set a joint, to
joint.

Cyman, cyfan, whole; cymanfa, a congregation, an assembly.

Cymar, a companion, a fellow; cymharu, to couple, to match.

Cymaws, courteous.

Cymedr, knowledge, skilful; cymedrol, moderate, proportionable,
temperate; cymhedroli, to proportion, to adapt, to temperate;
cymedrolder, temperance, moderation.

Cymherfedd, the middle, the centre.

Cymelrhi, a tumult, a disturbance.

Cymell, to urge, offer, compel.

Cymen, eloquent; cymhendod, eloquence; cymhennu, to adorn the speech, to
deck, to detract.

Cymer, confluence; conflict.

Cymeryd, to take, receive; cymeriad, acceptance, estimation; cymeradwy,
acceptable, esteemed, current; cymeradwyaeth, esteem.

Cymes, cymhesnrwydd, cymhedroldeb, mediocrity, a just proportion;
cymhesur, according to desert, meet, fit; cymhesurwydd, mediocrity, what
is enough; cymhesuro, to make meet, or fit.

Cymhibau, pipes, flutes, tubes; cymhibiog, full of tubes, interlinked,
bespangled.

Cymhlegyd, regarding.

Cyminedd, a battle, assembly.

Cymlawdd, commotion, tumult.

Cymod, reconciliation; cymodlonedd, concord; cymodi, to reconcile.

Cymon, compact, tidy, neat.

Cymradwy, broken, fragile.

Cymrain, crows.

Cymraw, fear, terror; cymrawu, to be afraid, or terrified; to fright or
scare.

Cymrawd, confrère, comrade.

Cymhrudd, sad, dejected.

Cymriw, a wound.

Cymro, _pl._ Cymry, Welshman; Cymraes, Welshwoman; Cymru, Wales; Cymraeg,
the Welsh language; Cymreig, Welsh.

Cymrodedd, reconcilement, concord, pacification, a coequal, peaceful,
social; cymrodeddwr, a peace-maker.

Cymrwd, mortar, plaster.

Cymrwyn, sadness, sorrow.

Cymrwysg, enormous, haughty.

Cymryd, to take, to receive.

Cymryd, of equal beauty.

Cymun, communion; cymuno, to communicate.

Cymwd, cwmwd, a hundred; cymydog, a neighbour.

Cymwedd, camwedd, iniquity, wrong, injury.

Cymŵedd, to jest; a joke.

Cymwy, affliction, trouble; cymwyo, to afflict, to trouble, to vex.

Cymwyll, to argue, mention; argument, reason, principle.

Cymwynas, a good turn, a kindness.

Cymwyn, productive, with young.

Cymwys, fit, meet.

Cymyn, legacy; llythyr cymyn, a will; cymynnu, to commend, to bequeath or
give legacies.

Cymynediw, command, injunction.

Cymynu, to cut, hew, chop with a hatchet; cymynwr, a hewer of wood;
cymynai, a hatchet, an axe; cymynad, cymynwr, he that strikes with an
hatchet, a hewer of wood; cymynawg, the stroke of an axe or hatchet;
cymyn, excision.

Cymyrred, cymyrredd, cymyrraeth, dignity, honour, esteem, acceptance, a
taking upon, arrogance; cymyreddus, proud, arrogant, acceptable,
grateful.

Cymysg, a mixture; cymysgu, to mix together.

Cŷn, a wedge; cynio, to wedge.

Cyn, before, sooner.

Cynan, speech; cynanu, to speak, to discourse, to pronounce.

Cynar, first ploughing, a sow.

Cyncan, white.

Cyndrychiol, cydrychiol, present, face to face.

Cyndyn, obstinate, perverse; cyndynrwydd, obstinacy, perverseness.

Cynddail, the leaves of the first spring.

Cynddaredd, madness, fury; cynddeiriog, mad.

Cynddelw, the first pattern.

Cynddrwg, as bad, as evil; cynddrygedd, malice, discord.

Cynddydd, the break of day, former days.

Cynfaran, strength, forefront.

Cynferthyr, the first martyr.

Cynflith, the first milk.

Cynfyd, the old time, the former time.

Cynfyl, strife, discord.

Cynffon, a tail; cynffonog, having a tail, or a long tail.

Cynhaeaf, harvest, autumn; cynhauafu, to gather in harvest.

Cynhafog, luxuriant.

Cynhaig, cynherig, in heat (of dogs); cynheica, to be in heat.

Cynhelw, cynnal, to uphold.

Cynhenid, innate, inherent.

Cynhwynol, natural, original, genuine.

Cynhyrchol, present; cynhyrcholder, presence.

Cyni, trouble, adversity.

Cynired, to frequent, to go often.

Cynlyn, canlyn, calyn, to follow.

Cynllaeth, the first milk.

Cynllwyd, grey, hoary.

Cynllwyn, to waylay; ambush.

Cynllyfan, a leash, commonly for grey-hounds.

Cynna, as good.

Cynnach, sooner, earlier.

Cynnadl, a disputation, a discourse; cynatla, to discourse, to dispute;
cynhadledd, communication.

Cynnal, to prop, uphold, or bear up; cynheliaeth, cynheilyddiaeth,
subsistence, sustentation.

Cynnar, betimes, timely; cynharwch, time convenient, good season,
opportunity.

Cynneddf, a quality, faculty.

Cynne, cynneu, to kindle.

Cynhefin, accustomed; cynhefino, to accustom.

Cynnelw, model, archetype.

Cynnen, discord, strife, contention, controversy; cynhennu, to contend,
to strive; cynhennus, contentious.

Cynnes, warm; cynhesrwydd, warmth; cynhesu, to warm.

Cynhewi, to hold one’s peace; cynhewydd, a silent man.

Cynnif, trouble, adversity; cynhifiad, cynhifiwr, an extortioner, an
oppressor.

Cynnifer, as many, the same number.

Cynnil, thrifty, wary, saving; cynhildeb, wariness, thriftiness; cynhilo,
to spare, to reserve.

Cyniwair, to frequent.

Cynnogn, the principal debtor; cynogi, to make himself debtor.

Cynnor, cyntor, outer door, porch; cynhordy, a porch, or entrance to a
door; cynhorawr, a door-keeper, porter.

Cynhorthwy, help; cynorthwyo, to help, to assist.

Cynnu, to kindle.

Cynnud, wood fuel; cynuta, to gather wood; cynutai, a wood gatherer.

Cynnull, to gather together; cynulleidfa, a congregation, an assembly.

Cynnwll, distance, space.

Cynnwrf, motion, disturbance, tumult; cynhyrfu, to disturb or move.

Cynnwys, to contain, encourage; cynnwys, compact, of little substance,
admission, license; cynhwyso, to make compact, to contract; cynhwysiad,
leave, permission, contraction.

Cynnydd, growth, increase; cynyddu, to grow, to increase.

Cynyddwest, a child’s coat.

Cynnyg, offer, attempt.

Cynnygn, adversaries, enemies.

Cynnyn, cynnen, a strife.

Cynnyrch, produce, production; cynhyrchu, to produce; cynyrchol,
cynhyrchol, cynyrchiol, productive.

Cynysgaeth, dowry, portion; cynysgaeddu, to endow, to give a dowry, or
portion.

Cynosod, the first assault or onset.

Cynrabad, happiness, good luck.

Cynrain, a family.

Cynran, cynrain, leader, hero.

Cynrhan, the first and greatest part.

Cynrhawn, cynron, maggots; cynrhawni, to breed worms or maggots.

Cynt, gynt, in times past, formerly, before.

Cynt, swifter, quicker.

Cyntaf, the first, the swiftest.

Cyntaid, virgin swarm.

Cyntefin, cynnefin, accustomed.

Cyntedd, a porch, entry.

Cyntor, cynnor, the post that the door shuts to.

Cyntorf, the first army.

Cyntun, a nap or sleep.

Cynwan, the first assault.

Cynwe, a web of cloth.

Cynwydd, land ploughed the first time.

Cynwyn, cynfwyn, the first fruits, or increase.

Cynwyre, a rising or first appearance; cynwyrian, to rise, to spring up.

Cynydd, a houndsman; cynyddiaeth, the office of a houndsman, hunting.

Cŷr = cyhyr.

Cyrbwyll, crybwyll, to make mention, to declare.

Cyrch, goal, mark; assault, charge; cyrchu, to gather together, to make
for.

Cyrdd, cerddau, songs, sonnets.

Cyreifiant, forgiveness.

Cyrfydd, an ale brewer.

Cyrff, _pl. of_ corff, the body, chest; cyrfyll, a little body; cyrfin,
well-framed.

Cyriawol, criafol, service-berries.

Cyrnig, corniog, horned; cyrniad, ceirniad, a blower in a horn, a cornet.

Cyrraedd, cyrredd, to reach or touch any thing, to attain.

Cyrrith, sparing, niggard, covetous.

Cysbyddwn, let us agree, or be at peace.

Cysefin, first, primitive.

Cysefyll, to consist.

Cysegr, a sanctuary; cysegru, to consecrate; cysegr-ladrad, sacrilege;
cysegr-lân, sacred, hallowed, inviolable.

Cysellt, conjuncture, opportunity.

Cysgod, a shadow, a shade; cysgodi, to shade.

Cysgu, a sleep, to sleep; cysgadur, a sleeper, sleepy.

Cyson, agreeing in sound; cysoni, to agree in sound; cysondeb, a concert
in music, agreement in sound.

Cyspell, close together, compact.

Cystadl, cystal, as good; cystadlu, to equalize, to compare; cystedlydd,
competitor.

Cysteg, grief, trouble.

Cystlwn, kindred, affinity; cystlynu, to join in alliance.

Cystog, drudge, slave.

Cystudd, affliction, trouble; cystuddio, to afflict, to vex, trouble.

Cystwy, chastisement, rebuke; cystwyo, to chasten, punish, rebuke.

Cysul, counsel, advice, to counsel.

Cysur, comfort, consolation, refreshment; cysuro, to comfort, to refresh,
to recreate; cysurus, comfortable.

Cyswllt, a conjunction, a joining, coupling; cysylltu, to join together.

Cyswyn, a consent, accord, agreement, confederacy, imputation; cyswynfab,
a reputed son.

Cysymaith, a journey together.

Cytal, to dwell together.

Cytgam, to jest, joke.

Cytir, a common, lands belonging to several; cytirogion, partners in
land, neighbours; cytref, of the same city or town; cytreftadog, co-heir.

Cytûn, agreeing, of one mind; cytundeb, concord, unity, agreement;
cytuno, to agree, to concord.

Cyty, a joint-house; cytyaeth, fellowship in one house.

Cytyn, drawing together, of one mind; cytynnu, to draw together, to
consent.

Cythlwng, a fast.

Cythraul, a devil, Satan; cythrawl, against, contrary, adversary;
cythreulig, devilish.

Cythrudd, cythruddiad, horror, trouble of mind; cythruddo, to disturb, or
trouble, to be disturbed, or provoked.

Cythrwfl, a commotion, a tumult; cythryblu, to disturb, trouble, or
afflict.

Cyw, a chicken, a young fowl; cywen, a pullet.

Cywaethlu, to strive, or contend; cywethl, a chiding, blaming, rebuking.

Cywain, to carry.

Cywair, order, trim, repair; cyweirio, to repair, to amend, to dress, to
geld; cyweirdeb, reparation, amendment; cyweirdabus, repaired;
cyweirdant, key-string, key-note; cyweirgorn, a quill, or any such thing
to strike on the strings of music.

Cywala, very like; an equal.

Cywarch, hemp.

Cyweithas, society, commerce, sociable; cyweithasrwydd, humanity,
courtesy, civility.

Cyweithydd, a troop, company.

Cywely, bed-fellow, consort.

Cywerthydd, a price, or value.

Cywestach, copulation, wedlock.

Cywilydd, shame, disgrace; cywilyddio, to shame, or disgrace one, to be
ashamed; cywilyddgar, shameful; cywilyddus, shameful, dishonest.

Cywir, true, faithful; cywirdeb, fidelity, faithfulness; cywiro, to
perform one’s promise, to rectify; cywiriad, the faithful.

Cywiw, worthy.

Cywlad, countrymen, of the same country; cywleiddiadon, persons of the
same country.

Cywraint, skilful, expert, knowing; cywreinio, to do a thing skilfully;
cywreindeb, skilfulness, knowledge, experience; cywrennin, skilful.

Cywrys, strife, contention; cywrysedd, cyfrysedd, crwysedd, strife,
contention.

Cywyd, temperament.

Cywydd, an ode, a metre of hepta-syllabic couplets; cywydd marwnad, an
elegy; cywyddaid, the maker or singer of elegies; cywyddoliaeth, the art
of making elegies.



CH.


Chwa, a blast, gale of wind.

Chwaen, opportunity, time.

Chwaeth, the sense of tasting, a taste; chwaethiad, blâs, a taste;
chwaethu, profi blâs, to taste.

Chwaer, sister; chwiorydd, sisters.

Chwai, quick, hasty, nimble.

Chwaith, neither; chweithach, much less.

Chwalu, to spread, to disperse, to scatter; chwalidydd, a disperser.

Chwannen, _pl._ chwain, a flea.

Chwant, hunger, appetite, lust, covetousness; chwannog, greedy, desirous,
covetous.

Chwarae, chware, to play; chwareydd, a gamester, a player;
chwareyddiaeth, chwaryddiaeth, a play, sport, or pastime, gaming.

Chwarel, a dart, javelin, spear.

Chwarien, mild, soft, slow; chwarienu, to wax mild or soft, to slacken
one’s pace; chwerig, leisurely.

Chwarren, a round rising, or swelling in the flesh like a ball.

Chwech, six; chweched, the sixth.

Chwedl, a fable, a tale, a story.

Chwefrin, severe, violent.

Chwefror, Chwefrol, February.

Chweg, sweet, pleasant.

Chwegr, a mother-in-law, a step-mother; chwegrwn, a father-in-law, a
step-father.

Chwel, a turning, revolution.

Chweledydd, a disperser.

Chwenychu, to desire, to covet.

Chwerig, interlude, a stage play.

Chwerfan, chwarfan, a whirl for a spindle, a pulley.

Chwerthin, laughter, to laugh; chwerthiniad, laughter; glas chwerthin, to
laugh a little.

Chwerw, bitter; chwerwi, to wax bitter; chwerwedd, bitterness.

Chweu, to wax tart, sour, or sharp.

Chwi, you.

Chwiban, chwibaniad, a whistling with the mouth; chwibanogl, _pl._
chwibenygl, a pipe, flute; chwibanogl fynydd, curlew; chwibanu, to
whistle.

Chwibl, sharp, biting, sour; chwiblo, to grow sharp, or sour.

Cwibleian, sibyl, nymph.

Chwidr, nimble; chwidredd, nimbleness; chwidro, to wax nimble.

Chwifiwr, a vagabond, a wanderer.

Chwil, chwilen, a beetle.

Chwil, turning, reeling.

Chwil-, thorough, very.

Chwilio, to search; chwilcath, a prying fellow.

Chwilenna, chwiltath chwilota, to pilfer, or steal; chwilennwr, a
pilferer, a pick-pocket.

Chwiliog, seer, magician.

Chwiliores, a great wasp, a hornet.

Chwim, chwimwth, nimble, swift.

Chwmio, to wander, to go astray.

Chwimp, hap, whim, freak.

Chwinsa, late; chwinsaf, chwinsang, evensong, evening.

Chwiog, bara tisen, bara calan, a sweet cake-bread.

Chwiongl, deceit, craftiness.

Chwiorydd, sisters.

Chwired, wickedness, deceit; chwiredus, deceitful.

Chwirligwgan, a whirligig.

Chwistl, chwistlen, shrew.

Chwistrell, a syringe; chwistrellu, to squirt.

Chwitafad, small beer, beer.

Chwith, left, wrong; chwitho, to tremble with fear; chwithig,
left-handed, wrong.

Chwithau, and you, you also.

Chwithrwd, to hiss, whistle.

Chwychwi, you.

Chwyd, chwdiad, a vomit; chwydu, chwdu, to vomit; chwydredd, corruption;
chwyd-awyr, star-shoot.

Chwydawiaeth, a trifling.

Chŵydd, a swelling; chwyddo, to swell.

Chwyf, a motion; chwyfio, to move; chwyfiwr, a vagabond.

Chwyl, a change, a turn.

Chwŷn, motion; chwyn a chwyn, by little and little.

Chwynn, weeds; chwynnu, to weed; chwynogl, a weeding-hook.

Chwyrn, swift, nimble, impetuous; chwyrnell, a whirligig; chwyrnu,
chwrnu, to snarl, to snore; chwyrno’od, a snarling.

Chwys, sweat; chwysu, to sweat.

Chwysigen, a bladder, weal, blister; chwysigennog, that has blisters, or
vesicles; chwysigennu, to blister.

Chwyth, a blast or gale of wind; chwythu, to blow.



D.


Da, good, goods, cattle; daioni, goodness; daionus, goodly.

Dabre, ho, hark.

Dacw, lo there, there is.

Dad-, un-, dis-, re-.

Dadannudd, an uncovering.

Dadebru, to awake, to revive.

Dadfarnu, to condemn.

Dadferu, to return, to restore.

Dadiain, renovation, renewed.

Dadl, an argument; dadleu, to contend, argue, dispute; dadleudŷ, a
parliament-house; dadlwriaeth, disputation.

Dadlaith, to thaw.

Dadmer, a thaw, a dissolving.

Dadmerth, to revive.

Dadolwch, satisfaction for an evil committed; dadolychu, to satisfy the
offended, or to be reconciled.

Dadwrdd, to prate, to make a noise.

Dadwyrein, to rise, raise.

Daear, daiar, daer, ground, earth; daearol, daiarol, earthly; daearu, to
bury, to lay in the earth; daerawd, daered, funeral rites and ceremonies,
a mortuary paid for the dead.

Daeru, to assign to, decree.

Daf, Dafon, Dafwy, God.

Dafad, a ewe; dafaden, a wart; defeity, sheep-fold.

Dafn, a drop; dafnu, defnynnu, to drop, to distil; defni, the dropping of
the eaves, the dropping that falls through the roof of a house.

Dafn, the threads on the shuttle.

Daffar, to prepare.

Dagrau, tears; daigr, degryn, deigryn, a tear in weeping; daigrynnu, to
drop like tears, to weep tears.

Dangos, to shew; dangoseg, a token to shew, a touch-stone to try gold and
silver; a table, or contents of a book.

Dail, leaves; dalen, a leaf of a book; deilen, a leaf of a tree, or herb;
deilio, to bear leaves.

Daioni, goodness.

Dal, dala, daly, to hold; dalfa, a with-holding, a holding.

Dall, blind; dallineb, blindness; dallu, to wax blind, to blind.

Damblygu, to fold about, to wrap about.

Damchwain, an accident, or event.

Damdwng, oath; to value.

Dameg, a parable, a riddle.

Damlewychu, to shine.

Damuno, dymuno, to beseech; damuned, dymuniad, a request.

Damwain, a happening, chance, accident; damwainio, to happen, or fall
out.

Dan, under.

Danadl, nettles.

Dannod, to upbraid, an upbraiding; danodiaeth, an exprobation, or
upbraiding.

Dansang, to tread, trample.

Dant, a tooth, _pl._ dannedd; deintws, a little tooth; danheddog, toothy;
de ntio, to bite, to fasten with the teeth; deintaidd, delicate, dainty.

Danys, gafr ddanas, a fallow deer.

Dâr, derwen, _pl._ deri, derw, an oak.

Dar-, per-, super,-.

Darbod, to provide, take care; darbodaeth, providence; darbodus,
provident.

Darfod, done, ended, finished; darfodedig, languishing, consuming,
decaying; darfodedigaeth, consumption.

Dargysgu, to sleep.

Darllain, to read; darlleawdr, darlleydd, darllennydd, a reader.

Darllaw, to brew; darllawydd, a brewer.

Darmain, prediction, foretell.

Darmerth, a preparation.

Darn, a piece; darnio, to cut to pieces.

Darogan, a prophecy, an oracle; daroganu, to prophesy, to foretell;
daroganwr, a foreteller.

Darostwng, to subdue, to bring under.

Darpar, preparation; darparu, to prepare.

Darrun, to nod, to sleep.

Darstain, to echo, or sound again.

Dart, a dart, arrow.

Darwein, to lead, run out.

Darymred, to walk about.

Dâs, daswrn, a rick of corn or hay; dasyrnu, dasylu, dasu, to make into
ricks.

Datgan, to declare; datceiniad, a singer, a speaker.

Datod, to untie, untwist; rip.

Dau, two; deuoedd, deuwedd, twain, both.

Daw, dawf, a son-in-law.

Dawad, dywad, to come.

Dawn, a gift, a reward; doniog, that has gifts.

Dawnsio, to dance, to leap.

Dawr, tawr, it behoves, interests.

Dead, carriage, behaviour.

Deall, understanding.

Dean, a captain over ten; a dean.

Dear, a sound, a noise, a roaring.

Deau, dehau, de, right, the south.

Debed, go, depart.

Debre, dabre, come, hasten.

Dechreu, beginning, to begin.

Dedfryd, a verdict, a sentence.

Dedwydd, dedwyddyd, dedwyddwch, happiness, blessedness.

Deddf, a law, a statute.

Deddyw, he came.

Def, _pl._ defion, right.

Defni, drops of rain; defnynnu, to drop.

Defnydd, denfydd, deunyd, matter or stuff wherewith any thing is made, an
use to put things to; defnyddio, to prepare any matter, to cut out.

Defod, a manner, a custom.

Deffroi, to awake.

Dêg, deng, ten; degfed, the tenth; degwm, tithe, tenth; degymu, to tithe.

Degle, ho, hark.

Dengyn, rustic, inhuman, barbarous.

Dehau, right, the south; deheubarth, the south part; deheubartheg, a
southern language; deheuberthig, belonging to the south; deheuwynt, south
wind.

Deifio, to singe.

Deifr, dyfroedd, waters.

Deigr, deigryn, degryn, a tear.

Deilw, the smallest part of the leg, called the lock of the leg, or the
foot.

Deilliaw, to proceed from.

Deincod, dincod, toothedge; deincodyn, the core of an apple, &c.

Deintgryd, deintcryd, the shaking of the teeth, chattering.

Deintur, a tenter.

Deiryd, to be related to.

Deisyf, deisyfiad, a petition, entreaty; deisyfu, to petition, to desire,
to beseech.

Dêl, will come.

Del, froward, arrogant, saucy; pretty, neat; delni, beauty.

Delbren, a club.

Delff, a countryman, a clown.

Delid, metal.

Delor, a wood-pecker.

Delw, an image; delwi, to wax pale, or wan, delwad, form, fashion.

Dellt, splinters; delltennu, to make into splinters.

Denu, to entice.

Deol, dehol, banishment; deolwr, he that banisheth.

Deon, a dean; deoniaeth, a deanery.

Deongl, dehonglu, to interpret.

Deor, to hatch, to breed.

Der, dogged, churlish.

Dera, y ddera, derdri, the devil.

Dere, come thou.

Derllydd, dyrllydd, dyrlleuydd, darllenydd, darllenwr, a reader.

Derwen, an oak-tree.

Derwyddon, wise men, prophets.

Deryw, it is done; derynt, they are perished, they are done and ended.

Destl, destlus, clean, delicate.

Dethol, deffol, to choose, to elect.

Deu, to separate, part.

Deu-, two-; deuban, doubly fulled.

Deubydd, it will be, it will come to pass.

Deuddeg, twelve; deuddegfed, twelfth.

Deugain, forty; deugeinfed, fortieth.

Deune, a colour.

Deupo, as it comes.

Dewaint, mid-night.

Dewin, a foreteller of things; dewinio, to foretell things; dewindab,
dewindabeth, dewiniaeth, prophecy, divination; dewiniaeth wyneb,
physiognomy.

Dewis, to choose, choice.

Dewr, strong, bold, hardy; dewrder, dewredd, valour, boldness, rashness.

Di-, without, not.

Diadell, flock, herd.

Diadlam, irrevocable.

Diadnair, irreproachable.

Diachar, not amiable, odious.

Diachor, not to be restrained, irrepressible.

Diafl, diafol, diafwl, diawl, the devil.

Diafrddwl, without care or sorrow.

Dial, to revenge, to punish; dialedd, dialaeth, vengeance, punishment.

Dialaeth, without sorrow.

Dialbren, a gibbet, a gallows.

Dialechdid, the art of logic.

Dianaf, without maim or blemish.

Diandlawd, full, abounding.

Dianc, to evade, shun, escape.

Diannod, presently, forthwith.

Diar, a noise, to make a noise.

Diarchar, without fear.

Diarchen, diarchenad, bare-footed; diarchenu, to put off one’s shoes,
uncover, undress.

Diareb, dihareb, a proverb; diarebu, to speak proverbs.

Diarffordd, out of the way.

Diargel, unhidden, manifest.

Diargyswr, nothing afraid.

Diargywedd, innocent, blameless.

Diaspad, dias, a noise, a clamour; diaspedain, to shout very loud.

Diatreg, without delay, immediate.

Diau, certain, assuredly, diheurwydd, certainty, truth.

Diau, a day; dieuoedd, days.

Dibaid, continual, incessant.

Diball, never failing.

Dibara, transitory, not durable.

Diben, an end, a conclusion, dibennu, to end, to conclude.

Dibl, daggle; diblo, to bedabble, daggle; dible, skirts, outskirts.

Diblygu, to unfold, to make clear.

Diboen, without pains, easy.

Dibr, a saddle.

Di-bris, valueless; dibris, rash.

Dibyn, a steep place; dibynnu, to hang on, depend.

Dicra, that eats but little, puny.

Dichell, craft, cunning, a cunning trick; dichellgar, crafty, full of
tricks.

Dichlais, dawn, grey morn.

Dichlais, secure, fast, safe.

Dichlyn, cautious, wary, nimble.

Dichon, to be able.

Dichwant, not greedy, not covetous.

Dichwel, without change, immutable.

Dichwen, dichwain, event, chance, accident.

Didach, to lie in wait, to lie hid; didachwr, a lurker, one lying in
wait.

Didanc, unpeaceable, peaceless.

Didawl, incessant, unwearied.

Didoli, to separate.

Diden, a breast, pap, dug.

Didoll, free from toll.

Didrain, solitary, lonely.

Didrâs, nothing akin, nothing related.

Didres, idle, without business.

Didro, without a turn.

Didro, a turning astray, an error, to mistake, err.

Didryf, a monastic life; didryfwr, a hermit.

Didwyll, without fraud.

Didwn, whole, complete, true.

Didyo, to take one’s house over one’s head, to remove; didudydd, the
making of one an exile.

Diddan, pleasant, merry; diddanu, to make merry, divert; diddawch,
diversion.

Diddarbod, heedless, improvident.

Diddawl, diddoli, didoli, to separate.

Diddawr, concern, interest.

Diddig, pleased, contented.

Diddos, tree from rain, that keep out rain; diddosi, to free, to secure
from rain.

Diddwyn, to carry.

Diddyfnu, to wean.

Diddym, a thing of nothing, of no use; diddymu, to abrogate, to abolish.

Diddysg, illiterate, unlearned.

Diebryd, obstruction, nullification; diebrydig, nullified.

Diebyd, violence, attack, danger.

Diechwng, afar off.

Diechwraint, without cunning.

Diechyr, inflexible, determined.

Dieding, unrestrained, ample.

Diedfydd, without doubt, certain.

Diedlaes, not slack.

Diedmyg, without honour.

Dieinach, unsparing.

Dieisor, matchless, incomparable.

Dieflig, devilish.

Dielw, vile, base; dielwedd, contempt, baseness; dielwi, to despise, to
vilify; dielwig, vile, contemptible.

Diell, dihyll, amiable, lovely.

Diemig, not very small, or little.

Dien, dihenydd, death, execution.

Dien, certain, calm, quiet, serene; young, not old.

Dienbyd, secure, without danger.

Diennig, that will not spare.

Difa, to devour; difaedd, devastation.

Difai, blameless, faultless; difeio, to amend, to correct, to make
faultless.

Difalldrain, to waste, to destroy.

Difan, immaculate, pure.

Difan, vain, fading, perishing; difanw, vain, to vilify, to despise;
difannu, to vanish away; difancoll, perdition.

Difas, deep, sagacious.

Difefl, blameless.

Difenwi, to revile, to rail, to taunt.

Diferu, to distil, to drop down by little and little; diferiog,
distilling.

Difêth, without fail.

Difiau, Thursday.

Difiog, untamed, unbridled, wild.

Diflaen, the point of a weapon.

Diflais, safe, secure.

Diflan, vanishing, fading; diflannu, to fade, vanish.

Diflas, tasteless, insipid, stale; diflasu, to lose taste, to become
insipid.

Diflisg, not peeled or doffed.

Difocsach, without boasting.

Difraw, fearless, heedless.

Difrawd, difrod, waste; difrodi, to waste, to destroy; difrodus,
wasteful.

Difreg, irrefragable, whole; difregwawd, enigma.

Difrif, serious, in earnest; difrifo; to be made, or become grave or
serious; difrifwch, earnestness.

Difro, an exile; drfroedd, banishment.

Diful, not simple, foolish.

Difwl, pure, spotless.

Difwyn, unprofitable, of no use; difwyno, to make a thing unprofitable,
or of no use, to mar, spoil.

Difwyn, denial, disclaiming.

Difyn, a piece, a fragment, a crumb; difynio, to cut in pieces.

Difyr, pleasant, joyful, diverting; difyrru, to divert; difyrrwch, mirth,
rejoicing, diversion.

Diffaith, a desert, a wilderness, vicious, vile, filthy, evil;
diffaithio, to waste, to spoil.

Differ, to defend.

Difflais, safe, secure.

Diffoddi, to quench, to put out, to extinguish.

Diffriw, to disfigure, shatter.

Diffrwyo, to substitute, serve instead of.

Diffryd, to defend; diffreidiad, diffreidiawg, a defender.

Diffuant, unfeigned, sincere.

Diffun, breathless, holding one’s breath.

Diffwn, dyffwn, deuwn, down, let us come.

Diffwyn, to defend.

Diffwys, steep, precipice.

Diffydd, di-ffydd, an infidel, faithless.

Diffyg, want, penury, need; diffygio, to lack, or fail.

Diffyn, to defend.

Diffyrth, he defended.

Dig, anger; digllon, digus, angry; digter, wrath, anger; digio, to wax
angry.

Digarad, forsaken, helpless.

Digardd, without reproach.

Digaredd without crime, faultless.

Digasog, malevolent, hostile.

Digennu, to scale fish.

Digibo, to shell, to take of the husk.

Diglist, a kind of clay used for mortar, bitumen, asphalt.

Digoddi, to free from injury; digoddiant, harmless.

Digon, enough; digoni, to satisfy, to do enough; digonol, sufficient,
full; digonoldeb, sufficiency.

Digoniant, power, valour.

Digraid, powerless, weak.

Digraidd, without a heart.

Digrain, error, wandering.

Digrawn, profuse, generous.

Digreifiant, unpardoned.

Digrif, pleasant, merry; digrifwch, merry words, mirth.

Digroeni, to flay, pare.

Digryd, without fear, undaunted.

Digwl, inculpable, blameless.

Digwydd, digwyddiad, an accident, an event; digwyddo, to happen, to fall
out.

Digyflydd, free from hindrance.

Digyrrith, liberal, bountiful.

Dihafarch, powerful, strong.

Dihatru, to undress, to strip naked.

Diheddawg, implacable, unquiet.

Dihenydd, death, fate, end, execution; dihenyddwr, a hangman, an
executioner.

Dihenydd, one who does not grow old; yr Hen Ddihenydd, the ancient of
days.

Diheuro, to clear one’s self.

Dihewyd, the affection, desire, devotion; dihewydus, devout, studious.

Dihinedd, a shower, a tempest.

Dihoeni, to wither as a flower, to abate in courage.

Dihort, unspotted.

Dihuno, to awaken.

Dil, work, structure, dil mêl, a honey comb.

Dilachar, stout, undaunted.

Dilain, dry not moist.

Dilaith, death.

Diledach diledryw, noble.

Diledlef, a clear perfect voice, language without barbarism.

Dileddf, unbending, straight.

Diletyb, without suspicion.

Dileu, to blot out, to destroy.

Dilin, polished, refined.

Diliw, phantom, spectre.

Diludd, unrestrained, irresistible.

Diluw, deluge.

Dilwfr, dilwrf, valiant.

Dilyd, dilyn, to pursue, follow, ensuing, to insist.

Dilys, certain, sure; dilysiant, without exception; dilysrwydd,
certainty, security; dilysu, to certify, warrant, guarantee.

Dilyth, not feeble, unflagging.

Dill, a fold, a wrinkle, form, fashion.

Dillad, clothes, dilladu, to clothe.

Dillwng, gillwng, to let go, to redeem.

Dillyn, neat, trimmed.

Dim, nothing.

Dimai a half-penny.

Din, dinas, a city; dinasfraint, citizenship, the liberty of a city,
dinasig, dinasaidd, petaining to a city; dinaswr, dinesydd, a citizen.

Dinam, without exception, faultless; dinamedd, certainty.

Dincod, dincodyn, the cores of an apple or pear; dincod ar ddannedd, when
the teeth are set on edge.

Dinerth, impotent, weak.

Dineu, to pour out.

Dinidr, without delay, presently.

Dinistr, destruction, dinistno, to destroy.

Dinoethi, to make bare.

Dinwyf, spiritless, discouraged.

Dioberi, a thing of naught.

Diod, drink; dioty, an ale house; diodlestr, a drinking cup.

Diod, diosg, to put off, strip.

Diodid, not doubtful.

Dioddef, to suffer, to endure; dioddefaint, suffering, enduring;
dioddefgar, patient; dioddefgarwch, patience.

Dioed, without delay.

Dioer, certainly, without doubt.

Diofal, negligent, careless; diofalwch, negligence, carelessness.

Diofeg, without expression.

Diofryd, diowryd, a vow; diofrydu, to abjure, to renounce.

Diog, slothful, lazy; diogi, to grow lazy, laziness.

Diogel, safe, secure, firm; diogelu, to make safe or secure; diogelwch,
security, caution.

Dioheb, unanswerable.

Diohir, without delay.

Diôl, trackless.

Diolatth, unslain.

Diolch, diolwch, thanksgiving, to give thanks; diolchgar, diolchus,
thankful; diolchgarwch, gratitude, thanksgiving.

Diolo diwolo, unconcealed.

Diorn, fearless peaceful.

Dios, without a doubt.

Diosg, to undress.

Diota, to tipple.

Dîr, certain, necessary; dirio, to necessitate, to compel, to press, to
urge; diriawr, a constrainer, one that presseth hard; dirfedd, the
inevitable grave; dirwall, great need.

Diras, graceless.

Diriaid, wicked, of an evil life; direidi, wickedness, lewdness,
naughtiness.

Dirdra, the highest injury.

Dirfawr, very great.

Dirgel, hidden, secret; dirgelu, to hide, conceal; dirgeledd, dirgelwch,
a secret mystery.

Dirisglo, to peel or bark a tree.

Dirmyg, contempt, disparagement; dirmygu, to despise, to slander, to
disparge.

Dirnad, to expound, to understand.

Dirper, owe, deserve; dirprwyo, to supply the place of another.

Dirwest, abstinence, a fast; dirwestu, to abstain from meat, to fast.

Dirwy, a fine, a penalty, a forfeiture; dirwyo, to impose a fine.

Dirwyn, to wind up.

Dis-, un, in-, dis-.

Dîs, a dye.

Disalw, valuable.

Disas, vile, base.

Disathr, untrodden.

Disberod, astray, separation.

Disbinio, to spoil.

Disbur, impure.

Disbwyll, discretion, prudence; disbwyllo, to make wise, to heal.

Disbyddu, to evacuate, to make empty.

Disgamar, dispersed, scattered.

Disgar, hated.

Disgethrin, rough, sharp, harsh.

Disglair, bright, shining; disgleino, to shine, to glitter.

Disgogan, to divine, to prophesy.

Disgreth, an out-cry, a shout, a roaring.

Disgriaw, to exclaim, to make a nose, to weep.

Disgwyl, to look, expect.

Disgybl, a disciple.

Disgyfrith, austere, fierce, cruel.

Disgymon, fuel.

Disgyn, to descend; disgynfa, a descent.

Disgyr, scream, shriek, wail.

Disgyrnu, to grind, gnash.

Disgywen, manifest, clear.

Dismythu, to vanish.

Dison, silent.

Dispaidd, gelded; dispaddu, to geld.

Distadl, vile, contemptible.

Distain, a steward.

Distaw, silent; distewi, to silence; distawrwydd, silence.

Distell, a drop.

Distreulio, to waste, to consume, to spend.

Distrewi, to sneeze often; distrawch, snuff.

Distrych, foam, froth.

Distryw, destruction; distrywio, to destroy.

Distyll, the flood or ebb of the sea; a distilling; distyllio, to fall by
drops, distil.

Diswydd, private without employment; diswyddo, to take away one’s
authority, to put one out of his office.

Disyfyd, sudden.

Disymud, immovable, firm, stable.

Disymwth, sudden.

Disyrch, diserch, without affection; disyrchu, to disaffect.

Ditriwr, a religious man, a hermit.

Diwad, unhidden, openly, that cannot be denied.

Diwadnu, to supplant, to trip up one’s heels.

Diwahan, inseparable.

Diwair, chaste, faithful; diweirdeb, chastity.

Diwall, abounding, wanting nothing; diwallu, to satisfy; diwallrwydd,
plenty, abundance; diwalltrain, difalltrain, to waste, consume.

Diwanfa, a straying.

Diwarnod, day.

Diwedd, an end; diwedydd, the evening.

Diwel, to pour out.

Diwellig, unfailing.

Diwestl, not dispersing, calm.

Diwg, without frowns, smiling.

Diwlith, dewless; maidenhair.

Diwraidd, without root; diwreiddio, to pull up by the roots, to destroy.

Diwrnod, diwarnod, a day.

Diwyd, diligent, devout, a follower; diwydrwydd, diligence.

Diwyg, faultless, without faults, habit, clothing; diwygio, to make
better, to amend.

Diwyll, to worship, till, plough; diwylliawdr, a worshipper.

Diwyn, to whiten, bless.

Diwyno, difwyno, to soil.

Diymdwng, without abjuration.

Diymgel, unhidden.

Diymsathr, not trodden.

Diymwad, sure, manifest, which cannot be denied.

Diysgog, unshaken, firm.

Diystyr, contemptible, inconsiderable; diystyru, to despise; disystyrwch,
contempt, disdain.

Dlêd, dyled, duty, debt.

Do, yes, yea.

Dodi, to give, put, or set.

Dodo, aunt.

Dodrefn, household stuff.

Dodwy, to lay eggs.

Doddoedd, he had come; doddyw, he came.

Doe, yesterday.

Doeth, wise, prudent; doethder, doethineb, wisdom.

Dôf, tame; dofi, to tame; dofydd, dofwr, a tamer.

Dofraeth, dofreth, lodging, quarters, maintenance, tax.

Doffr, dist, joist, beam.

Dogn, task, an allowance, commons; dognedd, a measure, a quantity; dogni,
to measure, to task.

Dôl, meadow, dale.

Dôl, a bow, ring; dolennu, to bend, bow, wind round.

Dolef, a clamorous noise, an outcry, a shout; dolefain, to cry out, to
bawl.

Dolur, disease, sickness, ache, grief, pain; dolurio, to ache.

Dom, dung, ordure.

Doniau, gifts; donio, to endow, to give, or bestow.

Dôr, a door.

Dori, to care, regard.

Dos, drop; dosog, spotted; diddos, that droppeth not, which leaketh not.

Dortur, dormitory.

Dosparth, division, distinction, discretion; dosparthu, to divide, part,
discern; dosparthus, prudent, discreet.

Dothyw, he came.

Dowydd, travail; dowyddu, to be in labour.

Drach, from.

Drachefn, again.

Draen, draenen, a thorn, a thorn-tree; draenllwyn, dreinllwyn, bush of
thorns.

Draenog, a hedgehog, an urchin.

Dragio, to tear in pieces; dragiog, torn.

Draig, a dragon.

Drannoeth, on the morrow.

Drefa, a thrave, or 24 sheaves of corn.

Dreng, froward, peevish, surly, churlish.

Drel, drelyn, a clown.

Drem, sight, aspect, glance.

Drewi, a stink, to stink; drewiant, a stench.

Drinc, dring, ascent, climbing; dringo, to climb; dringhedydd, dringwr, a
climber.

Dros, over, beyond, for.

Drud, violent, severe, dear, valiant, strong; drudaniaeth, dearth,
valour, boldness.

Drudwy, drudwen, a starling.

Drwgr, evil, wicked, bad; drygioni, naughtiness, wickedness, badness.

Drygchwant, lust, concupiscence.

Dryglam, mishap, misfortune, an ill end, unnatural death.

Drygnaws, frowardness, an evil constitution of body; drygnawsus, morose,
froward, ill-natured, disingenuous.

Drygwynt, a stink, noisome air.

Drygyrferth, lamenting, mourning; to lament, wail.

Drws, a door; drysor, a door-keeper, a porter.

Drwy, through.

Drycin, storm, tempest.

Drych, a looking-glass; drychiolaeth, a phantasy, a vision.

Dryll, a piece, or part; dryllio, to tear, to cut in pieces; drylliog,
torn, rent, cut in pieces.

Dryntol, dyrntol, dyrnddol, the handle of a cup, door-knocker.

Drysi, briars, brambles.

Drythyll, wanton, spirited.

Dryw, a wren.

Du, black, ink; duo, to blacken, to grow black; duedd, blackness,
darkness.

Dueg, the milt, the spleen.

Dûg, a duke.

Dul, a stroke, a blow.

Dull, form, fashion; dullio, to form, to fashion.

Duno, dyuno, to accord, to agree.

Dur, steel; durio, to edge with steel; durgaen, steel-clad.

Durfing, austere, hard, vigorous.

Duryn, a bird’s bill, a snout.

Duw, god; duwies, a goddess; duwdod, a deity; duwiol, godly; duwioldeb,
duwiolder, godliness.

Dwbl, two-fold, double.

Dwbled, doublet.

Dwbler, a great platter, a charger, basin.

Dwfn, deep.

Dwfr, water; dwír swyn, holy water; dwfr-iâr, a sea-fowl, a fen-dock.

Dwl, slow, dull.

Dwned (_Donatus_), grammar, saying, tattle.

Dwnn, dun, dusky, swarthy.

Dwr, water.

Dwrdd, noise, tumult.

Dwrn, a fist, a hilt, haft.

Dwsel, a spout, a water-cock, a tap.

Dwsmel, a dulcimer.

Dwst, dust, powder.

Dwy, two females.

Dwthwn, day, period.

Dwyf, dwyw, god; Dyfrdwy, Dee; dwyfol, dwywol, duwiol, devout, godly;
dwyfolder, dwywolder, duwiolder, devotion, godliness.

Dwyliw, dwylyw, two parties.

Dwyn, to carry, to bear, to steal.

Dwynfyg, bearing honour.

Dwyre, to rise, to raise; dwyreawr, a climber; dwyreawl, rising, orient;
dwyrain, the east.

Dwys, heavy, pressed; dwyso, to press; dwysder, weightiness, heaviness,
also gravity.

Dy, thy, thine.

Dy-, dys-, a prefix of enhancement.

Dyad, maxim, behaviour.

Dyar, a noise, a stir.

Dyblyg, a fold, wrinkle, double; dyblygu, to fold together.

Dyborthi, to carry, to bear.

Dybrunawg, meritorious.

Dybryd, deformed, ugly.

Dybu, he came.

Dybydd, it will be.

Dychan, satire, a carping song; dychanu, to revile in verse.

Dychlamu, to leap, to jump, to pant, palpitate, throb.

Dychlud, to bear or carry; dychludedd, comportation.

Dychrain, to prostrate, to do homage.

Dychreu, to croak like a crow.

Dychryn, dychryndod, fear, trembling, horror; dychrynu, to make afraid.

Dychrysio, to make haste, to hasten.

Dychwelyd, to turn back, to return.

Dychyfarfod, to meet with.

Dychymell, to press, to compel, to force.

Dychymyg, imagination, device, a riddle, a hard question.

Dychyrch, an assault, violence.

Dyd, hold! stop!

Dŷd, he will place.

Dydach, to lurk, skulk.

Dydd, a day; dyddio, to agree, to compose a difference; dyddiwr, an
aribitrator, a peace-maker.

Dyddelwi, to wax pale.

Dyddfu, to lack, or fail.

Dyddwyn, to carry.

Dyfal, diligent, careful; dyfalwch, diligence, carefulness.

Dyfalu, to miscall, nick-name; to conjecture, guess at.

Dyfloen, a piece, a splinter.

Dyfnu, suck, or draw out; dyfniad, a sucker.

Dyfod, to come; dyfodiad, a coming.

Dyfrgi, an otter; dyfriâr, a fen-duck, a wild-duck; dyfrlle, the channel
of a river; dyfrllyd, watery, moist.

Dyfryd, intent, thoughtful.

Dyfrydio, to warm, to heat.

Dyfrys, haste, speed; dyfrysio, to make haste.

Dyfwyo, to multiply.

Dyfydd, come, he will come.

Dyfyn, a summons; citation.

Dyfysgi, a tumult, confusion.

Dyffo, deuo, delo, may, or can come.

Dyffestin, a hastening, hurrying.

Dyfforddi, to direct.

Dyfforthi, sustain, carry.

Dyffryd, diffryd, to defend.

Dyffryn, dyffrynt, a valley.

Dyffwn, let us come, we will come.

Dygludo, to bring together.

Dyglyw, hark thou, hear thou.

Dygn, dygyn, severe, in great measure; dygnedd, sorrow, anguish; dygnu,
to trouble, to afflict.

Dygosel, snares, ambush.

Dygyfor, a tumult, the noise of waters, a multitude, a throng.

Dygymod, agree with.

Dyhedd, peace, truce.

Dyheu, dyhead, to pant, blow, throb.

Dyhir, loitering, idling, worthless, bad; dyhiryn, a wicked fellow, a
scamp.

Dyhuddo, to cover, pacify, silence; dyhuddiant, dyhyddiad, a pacifying,
pleasing, qualifying; dyhuddai, a pacifier.

Dylaith, a bow, ring.

Dylan, a sea.

Dyled, dled, a duty, debt; dylu, dyleu, dleu, to owe; dyledog, noble,
generous, a peer, imperial; dyledogion, peers, nobles, excellencies;
dyledowgrwydd, nobility, generosity.

Dyli, the habit of the body.

Dyli, dylif, flood.

Dylif, ystof, a weaver’s woof; dylifo, the warping of a web, to warp a
web.

Dylochi, to protect, shelter.

Dylofi, to handle, pat, to rid through the hands; dylofyn, dylwf, a
handful, a lock of wool.

Dyludo, to follow hard, to pursue.

Dylyfu gên, to gape, to yawn.

Dylu, dylyu, dyleu, to have a right to, to owe, to be in debt.

Dylusg, a drawing, haling; what is cast up by waves.

Dylluan, tylluan, an owl.

Dym, to me.

Dyma, here, here is.

Dymbi, it shall be to me.

Dymuno, damuno, to request, to desire.

Dyn, person, man; dynionach, men of no regard; dyndawd, dyndid,
dynoliaeth, humanity; dynol, dyniadawl, humane; dyno, dynan, a little
dwarf, one of no reputation.

Dyna, behold, there.

Dynesu, dynesau, nesu, to approach, to draw near.

Dyniewed, a steer.

Dynwared, to imitate, to mock.

Dyodor, tumult, confusion.

Dyrain, to lust, to covet.

Dyraith, without strength, weak.

Dyrawr, urgent, impulsive, lascivious; dyre, lechery.

Dyrchafu, to ascend; dyrchafad, dyrchafael, ascension; Dydd Iau
Dyrchafael, Ascension Thursday; offrwm dyrchafael, heave offering.

Dyre, come thou hither.

Dyrif, dyri, lyric, ballad.

Dyrllyddu, to deserve, merit.

Dyrnaid, a handful; dyrnod, a box, or blow with the fist, a stroke.

Dyrnfol, gauntlet, glove.

Dyrnu, to thrash; dyrnwr, a thrasher.

Dyrraith, fate, death; to be fated, to return.

Dyrras, wicked, naughty; dyraswch, mischief, wickedness.

Dyrru, to drive, push.

Dyrys, intricate, perplexed, entangled; dyrysi, dyryswch, intricacy;
dyrysu, drysu, rhwystro, to entangle, to encumber.

Dyserth, diserth, desert.

Dysg, dysgeidiaeth, learning; dysgu, to teach, to learn; dysgawdr, a
teacher, a doctor.

Dysgl, desgil, a dish, a platter.

Dysgogan, an oracle, a prophecy, an augury.

Dyspaddu, to geld.

Dyspaid, a cessation, an intermission; dyspeidio, to cease, to intermit.

Dyuno, to consent, to agree; dyundeb, consent, unity, concord.

Dyw, day.

Dywal, cruel, fierce.

Dywan, dywanu, to light upon, to find by chance.

Dywedyd, to say, to speak.

Dyweddi, a contract, betrothing of a man and woman before full marriage;
dyweddio, to give in marriage.

Dyweinio, to convey, introduce.

Dywenydd, delight, pleasure.

Dywod, dyfod, to come.

Dywrthred, adversity.

Dywynnyg, shining, splendid.



E.


Eang, eheng, wide, large, ample; free.

Eb, ebyr, said, saith.

Ebach, a strait, haven, angle, corner.

Eban, war, fighting.

Ebargofi, to forget.

Ebediw, a heriot.

Ebill, an auger, wimble, piercer, the pin of a harp or lute; ebillio, to
bore a hole with an auger.

Ebod, ebodn, horse-dung.

Ebol, a colt; eboles, a filly.

Eboludd, even now, by and by, forthwith.

Ebran, provender, fodder.

Ebrwydd, swift, suddenly, in haste; ebrwyddo, to hasten.

Ebryfygu, to forget.

Ebrwch, a sigh, a groan.

Ebwch, gasp, sigh.

Ebyr, aberoedd, brooks.

Ebystyl, apostles.

Echdoe, the day before yesterday.

Echel, axis, an axle-tree.

Echen, achen, a nation, people.

Echlys, echlysyr, a cause, or occasion.

Echryn, a trembling, fear, horror.

Echrys, harm, hurt, misfortune.

Echudd, in secret, hidden, hiding.

Echur, a disease, pain.

Echwng, near, towards.

Echwydd, late in the evening.

Echwyn, borrowed, that which is borrowed, or lent; echwyna, to borrow.

Echwyrth, foolish, rude, doting.

Echyng, narrow.

Echyngu, to draw near.

Edau, _pl._ edafedd, thread.

Edfryd, to render, yield up, restore to.

Edgyllaeth, sorrow, heaviness, lamenting.

Edifar, penitent; edifaru, to repent; edifeiriol, penitent; edifeirwch,
penitence.

Edlaes, deep towards the ground, long downward, trailing.

Edlid, irritation, malice.

Edling, a royal offspring.

Edliw, to upbraid.

Edlym, sharp-edged, severe ridged.

Edlynu, to spot, smear.

Edmyg, honour, glory; edmy, to honour, to praise, to glorify.

Edn, _pl._ ednain, a bird, fowl.

Ednogyn, a gnat, a fly.

Ednydd, the post of a gate.

Edrin, trîn, work, battles, dress; attend, order, or look after.

Edrybedd, edrybod, history.

Edrych, to behold, to look.

Edryd, edryf, a stock, family, kindred.

Edrydd, narrator, he narrates.

Edrysedd, abundance, competency, enough.

Edrywan, edrywant, edrywedd, a scent, a trace or track.

Edwi, to languish, to wax faint or feeble; edwin, faint, feeble, lean,
poor; edwino, to pine away, or languish.

Eddain, flowing, wandering.

Eddeifniad, he that draweth, or sucketh.

Eddefter, a colt.

Eddi, thrums.

Eddigor, a lord.

Eddrin, whispering, gossipping.

Eddrith, of varied appearance.

Eddyl, a nation, kindred, or people.

Eddyw, ethwy, aeth, went.

Ef, efe, he.

Efengyl, gospel; efengylwr, an evangelist.

Efelychu, to imitate, to resemble, to do the like.

Efellgyr, efyll, efeillion, twins.

Efnys, enemies, adversaries.

Efory, to-morrow.

Efrai, Hebrew tongue; Efrewysion, the Hebrews.

Efre, tares, weeds.

Efrllid, merit, desert.

Efryd, study, meditation.

Efrydd, maimed, lame, with blemish, ruinous.

Efwr, hedge, shelter.

Efydd, copper; efydden, efyddyn, cauldron, kettle, or pan of copper.

Efyrnig, a young goat.

Effro, awake.

Effros, euphrosy, eye-bright.

Egalen, whet stone.

Egfaen, hawthorn.

Egin, eginyn, a sprout; egino, to sprout.

Eglur, clear, manifest, visible; egluro, to manifest, to explain, to
clear up, to make visible.

Eglwg, visible, apparent.

Eglwys, a church; eglwyswr, a preacher.

Egni, vehemence, endeavour, force or vigour; egnius, egniol, striving
with all might, strong, mighty.

Egori, to open.

Egr, eager, sharp, tart, sour.

Egroes, eglantine berries.

Egru, to turn sour or acid.

Egrygi, roughness, evil.

Egryn, fear, trembling.

Egwan, weak.

Egweddi, a dowry, a portion.

Egwyd, fetlock.

Egwyddor, an alphabet, a catechism.

Egwyl, convenience, fit time.

Engi, to bring forth, to produce.

Engir, wonderful, strange, intolerable; engiriawl, anguriol, wonderful.

Englyn, a stanza.

Engyl, angel, an angel.

Engyll, _pl. of_ angell, the shoulder, or arm of a man, the pinion of a
bird, a wing.

Engyrth, wonderful.

Ehed, ehedeg, hedeg, to fly; ehediad, hediad, a flight.

Ehegr, swift, nimble.

Ehegyr, the staggers.

Ehang, wide; ehangder, largeness, breadth; ehengu, to amplify, to draw
out, to enlarge.

Ehoeg, a green colour.

Ehorth, eorth, diligent, studious.

Ehud, rash, easy to be deceived, simple; edhudrwydd, rashness.

Ei, his, hers; eich, your, yours.

Eichiog, loud, sounding.

Eidiog, quick, nimble, lively, amorous.

Eidion, an ox, bull, bullock.

Eiddew, eiddiorwg, ivy.

Eiddig, he that is jealous; eiddigedd, jealousy; eiddigeddu, to be
jealous; eiddigus, jealous.

Eiddigor, a lord.

Eiddil, small, slender; eiddilo, to make slender, or small; eiddilwch,
slenderness.

Eiddiog, near, hard-by.

Eiddiorwg, ivy.

Eiddo, his, the owning of a thing; eiddydd, eiddyn, theirs.

Eiddun, eidduned, adduned, vow; eidduno, to make a vow.

Eiddwng, a neighbour; near.

Eigian, igian, the yexing, hickup.

Eigion, the very bottom.

Eigrau, stockings without feet.

Eigr, maid, virgin.

Eingion, einion, a smith’s anvil.

Eingl, Angles, foreigners, strangers; enemies.

Eilfydd, alike, resembling.

Eil-, next, the second.

Eilier, gloyn duw, a butterfly.

Eilio, to weave, to arrange, to plait together; eiliad, a placing,
harmonizing.

Eiliw, a colour, a figure, image, form, shape.

Eiliwed, eiliwoed, disgrace.

Eilon, a young deer.

Eilon, music, melody; eilwy, minstrel.

Eilun, an image.

Eilwers, afresh, again, against.

Eilydd, second.

Eill = ill, they, those.

Eillio, to shave.

Ein, our, ours; einof, einwyf, eiddof, mine; einom, einym, eiddom, ours;
einod, einwyd, eiddot, thine.

Einioes, life.

Einiwo, to hurt, to damage.

Eirchiad, a petitioner, an asker; a bidder.

Eirf, yrf, arfau, weapons, tools.

Eiriach, to spare, to save.

Eirian, fair.

Eirias, eiriasdan, a great fire.

Eirif, a number.

Eirin, plums.

Eirioes, holy, fair, handsome.

Eiriol, eirioli, to intercede, mediate; eirioled, intercession.

Eirionyn, yrionyn, the selvage, or list of cloth; eirionyn tir, a
landmark.

Eirth, _pl. of_ arth, bear.

Eiry, eira, snow; eiriog, snowy.

Eirys, fair, amiable.

Eisdor, with broken ribs.

Eisen, asen, a rib.

Eisieu, eisiwed, indigence, want, need; eisiwedig, indigent, needy.

Eisilling, eisillydd, an offspring, progeny.

Eisin, bran, the husks of corn; eisingrug, a heap of bran, or corn husks.

Eisoes, yet, notwithstanding.

Eisor, alike, similitude.

Eistedd, to sit; eisteddfa, eisteddle, a seat; eisteddfod, a session.

Eisyddyn, a tenement.

Eithaf, the furthest, the uttermost; eithafigion, foreigners, strangers.

Eithin, furze, gorse.

Eithr, without, besides, but, because.

Eithrad, a stranger, a foreigner.

El, he goes.

Elaig, a hermit.

Elain, a hind-calf, a little fallow-deer, a fawn.

Elcys, elcysen, a wild goose.

Elech, a graven-stone, a slate, a stone-table, a bake-stone.

Eleni, yleni, this present year.

Elephant, an elephant.

Elestren, elestr, fleur-de-lis, sedge, flag.

Elfen, _pl._ elfennau, element.

Elfydd, alike, resembling; elfyddu, to compare, or liken.

Elgeth, aelgeth, the chin, the cheek.

Eli, salve; elio, to salve.

Elin, an elbow, a cubit.

Elor, gelor, elorwydd, a bier.

Els, a son-in-law, a step-son; elses, a daughter-in-law.

Elusen, eluseni, alms.

Elw, gain, profit; elwa, to gain, to profit.

Elwch, joy, gladness, mirth.

Elwig, a figure, form, shape; anelwig, without form, ill-shaped.

Elwlen, kidney.

Elydn, elydr, amber, tin, copper, brass, iron.

Elyff, elyfflu, oppression, force, trespass; a plague.

Elystan, a judge.

Ellael, an eye-brow.

Elldrewyn, a step-mother, a mother-in-law.

Ellmyn, High Germans.

Ellwng, to loose, or let loose, leak, let through.

Ellyll, a phantasy, a goblin, a hob-goblin; ellyll-dan, Will o’ the wisp;
ellylles, a she-goblin.

Ellyn, a razor.

Ellynedd, erllynedd, yllynedd, the last year.

Emig, very little.

Eminiog, hiniog, rhiniog, the threshold, a door-sill.

Emlyn, ymlyn, to pursue, to follow.

Emrwys, praise; strife.

Emyn, a hymn.

Emys, stone-horses, stallions.

Emyth, _pl. of_ amaeth, cullivator.

Enad, a native.

Enaid, a soul, a breath; eneidiol, endowed with a soul; eneidrwydd, the
temples of the head.

Enbyd, dangerous; enbydrwydd, danger.

Encil, a flight, a retreat, absconding; encilio, to fly, to withdraw out
of the way, abscond.

Enderig, a bullock.

Endewais, I heard.

Ener, a prince; native.

Enfys, a rainbow.

Enhuddo, to cover.

Enllib, calumny, reproach, slander; enllibio, to calumniate, to reproach,
to backbite.

Enllyn, all manner of things that are to be eaten with bread.

Ennaint, an ointment; eneinio, to annoint.

Ennyd, leisure, a while.

Ennyl, a snare; enylu, to bend, to level.

Ennyn, to kindle, to burn; enynfa, a burning flame, hatred.

Entyrch, entrych, the top, the height.

Enw, henw, a name; enwi, henwi, to name; enwog, illustrious, noble, in
renown, excellent, famous; enwogi, to make noble, or renowned, to make
famous.

Enwerys, praise.

Enwyn, butter-milk.

Eofn, eon, bold, adventurous.

Eog, a salmon.

Eorth, studious, diligent.

Eos, the nightingale.

Epa, an ape.

Epil, posterity, offspring; epilio, to increase a stock or lineage.

Epynt, hill, slope.

Er, for, although, notwithstanding.

Eraill, ereill, others.

Erbylu, pylu, to make dull, or blunt.

Erbyn, towards, against, by, right against.

Erbyn, derbyn, to receive, to accept.

Erch, a dark colour; cruel, horrible, terrible; erchyll, horrible;
erchyllu, to abhor, to be horrible, to be unpleasant to the eye.

Erchi, a bidding, to bid.

Erchwyn, the side post of a bedstead.

Erchwys, a pack of hounds.

Erchyll, _pl. of_ archoll, a wound.

Erddigan, harmony, concert in music.

Erddrym, strong, valiant, manly.

Erddygnawd, trouble, anxiety, sorrow.

Erechwydd, purpose, resolved.

Eres, wonderful; erysi, a wonder.

Erestyn, hurdy gurdy.

Erfai, blameless, faultless.

Erfawr, very great.

Erfid, _pl. of_ arfod, attempts.

Erfin, turnips.

Erfyll, arfoll, welcome.

Erfyn, to entreat; erfyniad, entreaty.

Erfyn, arf, tool, weapon.

Erglywed, hearing, to hear.

Ergryd, a trembling, or horror.

Ergyd, a shot, or cast; ergydio, to cast, to shoot.

Ergryn, a shaking, or trembling.

Ergyr, a vehement motion, a persuasion; ergyrwaew, the thrust of a spear.

Erioed, ermoed, in all times past; in no time past, never yet.

Erlid, to persecute, to pursue, to follow after.

Ermid, an hermit; ermidedd, an ascetic life, the life of a hermit.

Ermig, an instrument.

Ermygu, to adore, honour.

Ern, ernes, an earnest, pledge.

Ernyw, to hurt, to harm.

Ertrai, the ebbing of the sea.

Erthwch, grunting, puffing and blowing; erthychain, to grunt, puff or
blow.

Erthygl, an article.

Erthyl, a castling, an abortive; erthylu, to bring forth before the time.

Erthyst, a witness, evidence.

Erw, an acre of land, also a little close of ground.

Erwan, weak.

Erwân, a prick or stab.

Erwyd, pike, spear.

Erwydedd, vice, sin.

Erwydd, rods for perches, or to hedge with.

Erŵyr, crooked, warped.

Eryl, order, guard, watch.

Eryr, an eagle.

Erystalm, a long while ago.

Erythiolaf, I pray, give thanks.

Esborthiaid, nourishers, bringers up; esborthiant, food.

Esbyd, guests, strangers.

Esgar, an enemy, adversary.

Esgair, a leg, shank; esgeirca, to walk.

Esgeulus, negligent, careless; esgeulustra, negligence, carelessness.

Esgid, a shoe.

Esglywyn, to defend.

Esgob, a bishop; esgobaeth, a bishopric; esgobty, a cathedral church.

Esgor, to bring forth; esgorwraig, a midwife.

Esgud, lusty, active, diligent.

Esguraw, to beat, to knock.

Esgus, an excuse; esgusodi, to excuse.

Esgwn, ysgwn, nerth, strength.

Esgyn, to ascend; esgynfa, an ascent; esgynfaen, horse-block.

Esgyrn, _pl._ of asgwrn, bones.

Esing, cyfyng, straight, narrow.

Esill, esillydd, esilltydd, silltydd, a progeny, off-spring.

Esmwyth, soft, easy, smooth; esmwytho, to mollify, to soften, to ease;
esmwythdra, rest, easement.

Espeduriaeth, hospitality.

Esponio, to expound; esponiad, exposition, explication.

Estron, one not related, a stranger, a foreigner.

Estyll, _pl._ of astell, boards.

Estyn, to stretch, to extend, to reach.

Eswrn, fetlock joint.

Esyddyn, dwelling, mansion.

Esythu, to impale.

Etcyr, _pl. of_ atcor, furrows.

Etewyn, ytewyn, pentewyn, a fire-brand.

Etifedd, an heir.

Eto, etwa, atwaeth, as yet, yet, again.

Ethol, dethol, deffol, to choose.

Ethrefig, home-staying.

Ethryb, a cause, an occasion.

Ethrywyn, athrywyn, to part, or put asunder them that fight.

Ethy, a spur.

Eu, their, theirs.

Euddon, hand-worms, mites, small maggots.

Eulon, dung.

Eulyn, eilun, an image.

Euod, euon, llynger, maw worms.

Euog, guilty, faulty.

Eur = aur; eurdde, gilded; eurgrawn, a treasure; eurin, eurinawl, euraid,
golden; eurych, a goldsmith, a brazier, tinker; eurychaeth, the art of a
goldsmith, brazier, or tinker.

Eurllid, efrllid, merit, desert.

Ewaint, youth.

Ewais, I heard.

Ewig, a hind, a doe; a young stag, or hart.

Ewin, the nail of a finger or toe, a bird’s claw.

Ewinallt, a precipice, a steepy ascent.

Ewinor, a whitlow.

Ewybr, soon, quickly, speedily.

Ewydn, stiff, hardy, tough.

Ewyllys, will, a will, a desire, or inclination; ewyllysio, to will, to
desire; ewyllysgar, willing.

Ewyn, foam, froth; ewynnu, malu ewyn, to foam, or troth; ewyngant, the
whiteness of foam or froth, breakers.

Ewythr, ewyrth, an uncle.



F.


Fagddu, y fagddu, utter darkness.

Fano, prosper, speed.

Fal, fel, mal, as, even as.

Fall, evil, mischief, Belial.

Fed, even to, until.

Fory, to-morrow.

Fy, mau, mine, my.



Ff.


Ffa, beans; ffauen, a bean.

Ffaced, caws posel, posset, curds.

Ffael, error, mistake; ffaelu, to mistake, deceive, be deceived.

Ffaeth, mellow, ripe, soft; ffaethder, mellowness, ripeness.

Ffafr, favour.

Ffagl, a flame, blaze; ffaglu, to flame, blaze; ffagod, ffagoden, a
faggot.

Ffaig, stop, extremity.

Ffair, a fair.

Ffald, a sheepfold, a fold.

Ffaling, mantle, cloak.

Ffalm, boisterous.

Ffals, false; ffalsder, falsehood.

Ffallach, ffollach, waddler, squab.

Ffannugl, prosperity.

Ffasgau, faggots.

Ffat, dul, lab, a stripe, stroke, a blow.

Ffau, a den.

Ffaw, a lord, fame, honour.

Ffawd, happiness, good luck; ffodiog, happy, fortunate.

Ffawg, delight.

Ffawr, grace, favour.

Ffawydd, pine trees.

Ffed, demeanour, conduct.

Ffel, wary, cautious, crafty.

Ffelaig, a general, a captain.

Ffenestr, ffenest, a window.

Ffêr, the ankle, or ankle bone of the foot.

Ffer, fferdd, strong, fixed.

Fferr, fferdod, extreme cold; fferru, rhynnu, to become very cold, to
perish with cold.

Fferm, a manor, a farm.

Fferyll, fferyllt, chemist, magician.

Ffest, hasty, speedy; ffestiniaw, to hasten.

Ffetan, a sack, or bag.

Ffeutur, tin, white lead.

Ffiaidd, abominable, disdainful, loathsome; ffieidd-dra, abomination,
loathsomeness, disdain.

Ffigys, figs; ffigysbren, the fig tree.

Ffilog, eboles, a filly; the wing, the spoke.

Ffilor, ffilores, a musician; ffiloreg, vain talking, babbling.

Ffin, finis, an end, a fine, tax, forfeit; ffinio, to border upon, to
fine.

Ffiogen, a cony, rabbit.

Ffiol, a cup; ffiol fresych, a plate, trencher, saucer.

Ffion, red, reddish, foxglove.

Ffithlen, an adder.

Fflaced, fflagen, a flagon, jug.

Ffladr, loquacious, foolish.

Fflangell, a whip, scourge; fflangellu, to scourge.

Fflaim, a lancet; ffleimio, to lance.

Fflam, a flame; fflamio, to kindle, flame, be inflammable; fflamychedig,
inflamed; fflamddwyn, flame-bearing.

Fflaw, a splinter, banner, flag, ensign.

Ffled, stinted, scarce.

Fflichio, to squeal.

Ffloew, clear, bright.

Fflur, bloom, fairness; fflureg, fore-deck of a ship.

Ffluwch, a lock of hair.

Fflwch, valiant, lusty, active, liberal.

Fflwring, ffloring, a noble, 6/8.

Ffo, flight; ffoadur, a fugitive.

Ffoc, furnace, cauldron.

Ffodiog, fortunate, happy.

Ffol, foolish; ffoledd, folly.

Ffolen, bontin, a buttock, haunch.

Ffollach, a boot, buskin.

Ffon, a staff, spear; ffon waew, a spear.

Fforch, a fork; fforchog, forked; fforchogi, to make forked.

Ffordd, a way, passage; fforddio, to direct; fforddol, fforddolion,
travellers; fforddrych, acquainted in the way.

Fforio, to spy, search; fforiwr, a spy, searcher.

Ffortun, fortune; ffortunol, ffortunus, fortunate.

Ffôs, a ditch.

Ffos, a sword, hanger; ffosod, a stroke.

Ffothell, a weal, blister, pimple.

Ffraeth, short, eloquent, discreet, fierce; ffraethder, eloquence,
discretion, fierceness.

Ffrae, fray.

Ffrau, frreu, loose, flowing, battle.

Ffrautur, a fraternity of religious men.

Ffraw, fair.

Ffrawdd, ffrawd, harm, hurt; ffrawddus, hurtful.

Ffrec, babbling.

Ffregawd, chatter, affectation.

Ffrengig, Ffreinig, French; bytheiad Ff., a bloodhound.

Ffreu, a flood; ffreuo, to flow.

Ffrewyll, a whip, scourge; ffrewyllio, to scourge.

Ffrio, to fry.

Ffristial, a box to cast dice from.

Ffrith, ffridd, ploughed land lately taken out of a mountain.

Ffriw, countenance.

Ffrochwyllt, furious.

Ffroen, a nostril; ffroeni, ffroenio, to blow, or breathe at the
nostrils, to snort; ffroenfoll, ffroenlydan, having open or wide
nostrils.

Ffrom, fuming, angry, fretful; ffromi, to fume, to murmur, to wax angry.

Ffronc, cut gwyddau, a cage to feed geese in.

Ffrost, boasting.

Ffrowyll, ffrowys, turbulent.

Ffrwd, ffrydan, a stream.

Ffrwst, hurry, haste; ffrysio, ffrystio, to hurry.

Ffrwyn, a bridle; ffrwyno, to bridle, to refrain, to constrain.

Ffrwyth, fruit, life, motion; ffrwytho, to bear fruit, to fructify;
ffrwythlawn, fruitful.

Ffuant, dissimulation, hypocrisy; ffuantus, counterfeiting, dissembling;
ffuantwr, a hypocrite, a dissembler.

Ffug, delusion, a lie; ffugiol, lying, deceitful; ffugwyr, hypocrites.

Ffugl, a wind.

Ffull, haste, speed; ffullio, to hasten, to make speed.

Ffumer, a chimney.

Ffun, breath, soul.

Ffun, a handful; ffunell, a handful, a gripe, or handful, bound together.

Ffunegl, a furrow.

Ffunen, swathel, swaddling-band.

Ffunud, manner, figure, form.

Ffur, wise, learned, cautious; ffurnes, sharpness of wit.

Ffured, a ferret.

Ffurf, a form, method; ffurfeiddio, to form, to put into a method.

Ffurfafen, the firmament.

Ffust, a flail; ffusto, dyrnu, to beat with a flail, to thrash.

Ffwdan, haste, speed; ffwdanus, full of business.

Ffwgws, tobacco.

Ffwlbart, a fitchet.

Ffwrch, twist fork.

Ffwrn, an oven, a furnace.

Ffwrw, fur.

Ffwyr, hurt, harm.

Ffyd, garments.

Ffydd, faith; ffyddio, to believe, to confide.

Ffylliog, overgrown, gloomy.

Ffynidwydd, fir trees.

Ffyniant, prosperity; ffynnu, to prosper; ffynadwy, prosperous.

Ffynnon, a spring, or well; ffynhonwys, gofer ffynnon, a well, also the
earth which the well watereth; ffynhonnell, a little well.

Ffyrf, firm, strong, thick; ffyrfder, strength, massiveness.

Ffyrling, a farthing.

Ffyrnig, crafty, cruel; ffyrnigrwydd, craftiness, cruelty; ffyrnigo, to
wax crafty, to grow cruel.

Ffysg, brys, haste; ffysgiad, a hastener, a stubborn stiff man;
ffysgiolin, quick, impetuous, liberal.



G.


Gadael, gadel, gadaw, to leave, forsake.

Gadaledd, luxury, lasciviousness, incontinence; gadales, a harlot;
gadalus, lustful.

Gaddaw, a promise.

Gaeaf, winter; gaeafu, bwrw’r gaeaf, to winter.

Gafael, a hold; gafaelu, to hold, catch, apprehend; gafaelus, gafaelgar,
having a sure hold.

Gafl, gaflach, the lap, the inner part of the thighs, a barbed missile, a
lance, dart; gaflgam, bandy legged.

Gaflaw, a trout, a young salmon.

Gafr, _pl._ geifr, a she-goat; gafr y dwr, a water spider.

Gafrio, gafra, to sheaf.

Gafflaw, worthy.

Gagen, cleft, gulf.

Gaing, a wedge.

Gair, a word; geiriog, an orator, one full of words.

Gaith, a stroke, blow.

Gâl, a goal, or a mark.

Galaeth, alaeth, grief.

Galanas, murder, retribution.

Galar, mourning, lamentation; galaru, to mourn, lament; galarus,
mournful, lamentable; galarwisg, a mourning dress.

Galofydd, architect.

Galon, enemies, strangers.

Galw, to call, invoke; galwad, vocation, calling; galwai, geilwad, he
that calleth, a common crier.

Galwyn, a gallon, or four quarts; galwynaid, a gallon full.

Gallmarw, half dead.

Gallu, gallael, gallel, to be able; gallu, galluedd, power, might;
galluog, gallus, mighty, powerful.

Gallt, allt, an ascent.

Gan, by, with, because.

Gangylchwy, a buckler, or shield.

Ganthu, ganthudd, ganthynt, with them, in the possession of them.

Ganydoedd, he was born.

Gar, ger, nigh, before, in present; gar llaw, hard by, just at hand;
garbron, before, in presence of.

Garr, shank, ham; camedd garr, the bend of the knee; gargam, having
wrested knees or shanks; afal garr, knee pan.

Garan, y cryr llwyd, y gwddw grug, a crane, or heron.

Garawys, Lent, or the seven weeks before Easter.

Gardas, a garter.

Gardd, a garden.

Garddwy, caraway.

Garm, germain, a clamour, an outcry.

Garmwyn, garmwynion, troopers, horsemen, knights.

Garth, a promontory, a hill; lluarth, a camp where an army lies.

Garw, rough, coarse.

Gast, a bitch.

Gau, false.

Gaudy, jakes.

Gaugrefydd, gaulith, heresy.

Gawci, a crow.

Gawr, a noise, shout, outcry; gawri, to shout, or make a noise.

Gefail, a pair of tongs; gefail gôf, a smith’s shop; gefail bedoli, a
pair of pinchers.

Gefell, a twin.

Gcfyn, fetter.

Geirlyfr, a dictionary.

Geirw, waves, billows.

Gele, _pl._ gelod, leech.

Geleu, stream, flood.

Gelor, elor, a bier.

Gelyn, an enemy; gelyniaeth, enmity.

Gell, a bay colour.

Gell-ast, a mastiff-bitch; gellgi, a mastiff.

Gellwng, gillwng, gollwng, to let loose, redeem, absolve.

Gellyg, gerllyg, erwning, pears.

Gem, a gem, jewel.

Gên, a chin.

Genau, mouth; genau goeg, a newt, a lizard.

Genfa, gwenfa, a barnacle to set on a horse’s nose; the bit of a bridle.

Geni, to be born; genedigaeth, a birth.

Geneth, maid, damsel.

Genni, to be contained.

Genwair, an angling-rod; genweirio, to angle.

Ger, gar, before, in presence; gerllaw, near; gerfydd, by.

Geran, gerain, to cry, to howl.

Geri, choler, bile, gall.

Germain, to make a noise, to howl.

Gerran, a dwarf.

Gerwin, rough, cruel; gerwindeb, roughness, cruelty; gerwino, to grow
fierce, or cruel.

Gestwng, gistwng, gostwng, to incline, bow down, to adore.

Geuog, false, lying.

Gewai, one that is very lean.

Gewyn, nerve, sinew.

Giach, a snipe, little woodcock.

Giau, sinews.

Gilydd, one another.

Gillwng, to let loose, to absolve.

Ginio, to pluck off the wool, make bare, tease; gwlan ginn, wool teased
or plucked off.

Gingroen, toad-flax.

Gildio, to gild.

Girad, cruel.

Giten, a she-goat.

Glaead, cow-dung, dried up.

Glafoerion, slaver.

Glaif, a hedge-bill, scythe, reaping hook, sickle.

Glain, a precious stone, a gem.

Glain cefn, the back-bone.

Glan, clean, fair, beautiful; glendid, cleanness, beauty; glanhau, to
cleanse, purge.

Glann, a bank by a waterside.

Glâs, blue, pale; glasder, glesni, blueness, also paleness; glasu, to wax
pale, to wax blue, to dawn; glas-chwerthin, gwenu, to smile or laugh
seemingly or privily; glasresaw, a half welcome; glaswawd, affected
praise; glashaid, a young swarm; glas y dorian, kingfisher; glaslys,
woad.

Glastennen, the scarlet oak.

Glastorch, a little wolf, or fox.

Glaw, _pl._ glawogydd, rain; glawog, rainy; glawio, to rain.

Gleisiad, a salmon.

Glew, courageous; glewder, fortitude, valour, courage.

Glin, a knee.

Glo, coal; globwll, a coal-pit.

Globyn, a globe.

Gloddest, a riot, any excessive eating, or drinking.

Gloes, loes, a pang, or pain, also an ecstasy; gloesygu, to faint, or
swoon.

Gloew, clear, bright; gloewi, to make bright, to clear up.

Glofoerion, slaer.

Gloyn duw, a butterfly.

Glud, glue, bird-lime.

Glud, stiff, stubborn, and patient.

Glwth, ravenous, gluttonous, devouring; glythni, glythineb, gluttony,
voracity.

Glwth, mainc esmwyth i orwedd arni, a couch.

Glwys, glan, teg, fair, comely.

Glynn, a grove, wood, dale.

Glynu, to stick, hold fast.

Glyw, a ruler.

Gnawd, arferol, customary; gnodawl, much in use, accustomed; gnotaf,
chiefly accustomed, most in use; gnotau, to accustom.

Gnaws, naws, nature.

Gne, a colour.

Gnîf, grief, trouble, labour, pain, affliction.

Gnotai, halo.

Gnythawd, voracity.

Go, somewhat; goa ael, a slight hold; gobell, somewhat far; gochrwm,
somewhat crooked.

Gobaith, hope; gobeithio, to hope.

Gobant, a little valley, or dale.

Gobell, a saddle.

Gobennydd, a bolster.

Gobr, gwobr, gobrwy, a reward, wages, stipend; gobrwyo, dobri, to reward.

Gobryn, desert, merit; gobrynu, to deserve.

Gobwyllo, to consider, provide.

Gochel, gochelyd, gochlyd, gwagelyd, to beware, to shun, avoid.

Godeb, pride.

Godech, a hiding, lurking; godechu, to lie hid, to lurk; godechwr, a
lurker, he that hideth himself, or lieth in wait.

Godidog, excellent.

Godineb, fornication, incontinence, adultery.

Godor, delay, hinderance, intermission.

Godorun, a tumult, noise, uproar.

Godre, skirts, edges.

Godremydd, an aspect.

Godrig, delay, habitation, dwelling.

Godro, to milk.

Godrudd, active, armed.

Godrwyth, wild beet, white clover, melilot.

Godwrf, godwrdd, a tumult, uproar.

Gody, outhouse.

Goddaith, a great fire, a burning flame; goddeithio, to set on fire.

Goddau, an intent, purpose, design.

Goddef, dioddef, to bear, suffer, endure; goddefedd, patience; goddefus,
patient.

Goddeg, gofeg, one’s mind, or pleasure, speech.

Goddif, to throw, fling.

Goddiwedydd, towards night, somewhat late, evening.

Goddiwes, gorddiwes, to overtake.

Goddwr, adviser, accessory.

Goddyn, axis, pivot.

Goer, cold, fresh.

Gof, a smith; gofaniaeth, the craft, trade of a smith.

Gofal, care; gofalu, to take care; gofalus, careful; gofeiliaint,
gofalon, care, heaviness, pensiveness, troubles.

Gofeg, one’s mind, or pleasure.

Gofer, gofer ffynnon, a rivulet, or stream that runs out of a well;
goferu, to flow, to spring out, to distil; goferol, purling.

Gofid, pain, misery; gofidiaw, to endure pain, to ache; gofidus, full of
pains, or aches.

Goflaen, point.

Goflawd, scattered meal, or mill dust; goflodi, to scatter meal.

Goflew, soft hair, down.

Gofod, space.

Gofram, jeer.

Gofron, a little hill, or mountain.

Gofuned, a vow, promise to God, petition, request.

Gofwy, a visitation; gofwyo, to visit.

Gofyged, honour, glory.

Gofyn, to ask, request; gofyniad, a request.

Gofynag, gofynaig, hope, trust, vow.

Goffri, to honour.

Gogamp, an inferior feat.

Gogan, dispraise; goganu, to dispraise; gogan-gerdd, a satire, a satiric
poem, a carping song.

Gogawn, gwogawn, strong, manly.

Gogawr, corn, fodder.

Gogelyd, gochelyd, to beware, to defend one’s self.

Gogil, decline, wane.

Goglais, a tickling; gogleisio, to tickle.

Gogledd, the north.

Goglud, trust, dependence.

Gogo, to pray.

Gogof, ogof, a cave, or den.

Gogoned, glorious; gogoneddu, to glorify; gogoneddus, glorious.

Gogr, a sieve; gogryn, gogrynnu, to sift, or sieve.

Gogrisbin, somewhat dry.

Gogusa, to play an interlude.

Gogwydd, inclining, bending, a leaning of one side; gogwyddo, to incline,
bend, lean sidewise.

Gogwys, gwys, gwyddis, it is known.

Gogyfaddaw, to threaten.

Gogyfnos, late.

Gogyfoed, of the same age.

Gogyhyd, of equal length, equinox.

Gogymraff, of the same, or equal thickness.

Gohebu, to speak, to talk.

Gohen, gwohen, gwyrni, obliquity, crookedness, bias.

Gohir, a delay, a lingering; gohir ddadl, hir gyfraith, a tedious suit of
law; gohirio, to delay, prolong, defer.

Gohybu, hybu, recruit, to take courage.

Golaith, death, a slaughter.

Golchi, to wash, to beat; golchbren, golchffon, a washing spatula;
golchion, dish-water; golchwraig, golchuries, a washer-woman, a
laundress; golch, urine.

Goleu, goleuad, goleuni, light; goleuo, to light, give light; goleurwydd,
lleurwydd, light; goleune, a tint.

Golfan, a sparrow.

Golinio, to beat with the knee.

Golo, golof, gwolo, property, riches, profitable, beneficial; golofaidd,
rich.

Golochwyd, prayer, worship.

Golosgi, to burn a little; golosged, that which is singed, something;
burned, tinder.

Golud, riches, wealth; goludog, rich, wealthy.

Golwch, prayer.

Golwg, the eye-sight; golygawd, golygiad, a sight, aspect; golygu, to
behold, regard, oversee; golygwr, an overseer; golygus, seemly, fair to
the eye.

Golwrch, a box made of box-tree.

Golwyth, a rasher, or collop.

Golychu, to pray; golychwyd, prayer; golychwydol, religious, devout,
given to prayer.

Gollewin, gorllewin, the west.

Gollwng, to let loose, redeem, absolve; gollyngdod, relaxation,
redemption, absolution.

Gomach, a leg, or shank.

Gomedd, to deny.

Gor, corruption; gori, to grow into matter, to corrupt in the flesh;
gorllyd, putrified, corrupted.

Gor, above, higher, before.

Goradain, wings, winged.

Gorafun, gwarafun, gwrafun, to grudge, forbid.

Gorair, an adverb.

Goralw, to call often, to enquire after.

Gorawen, joy, gladness.

Gorchaled, very hard.

Gorchan, a charm, enchantment; gorcheiniad, a magician, enchanter.

Gorchaw, _pl._ gorcheifn, gorcheifnaint, a nephew, or niece.

Gorchest, exploit, excellence.

Gorchfanad, gorchfanau, gorcharfanau, jaws.

Gorchfygu, to vanquish.

Gorchorddion, retinues.

Gorchuddio, to hide, to cover; gorchudd, a lid, cover.

Gorchwino, to attest, to verify.

Gorchwy, great, extreme.

Gorchwydd, a fall.

Gorchwyl, work, labour, business.

Gorchyiarwy, the dusk of the evening, twilight.

Gorchymyn, a precept, a commandment; gorchmynnu, to command, to give a
charge.

Gorchynan, loquacity, babble.

Gordd, a wooden mallet, hammer, a churn-staff; gorddod, the stroke or
knock of a mallet, a push or thrust with a churn-staff.

Gordden, destiny, necessity.

Gordderch, a concubine, a bastard; gordderchu, to commit fornication.

Gorddifanw, difanw, decaying, frail, fading, perishing, evanescent.

Gorddifer, to drop fast, to distill.

Gorddifwng, constant.

Gorddigor, state, condition, habit, dress, equipage.

Gorddillwng, to absolve, to let loose, to loosen.

Gorddin, a flux, issue, flowing; gorddined, to pour out, issue, flow.

Gorddiwes, goddiwes, to overtake, out-do, subdue, compel.

Gorddor, a hatch, or little door, a postern.

Gorddwfn, a deep, gulf, whirl-pond, pool.

Gorddwr, high water, flood.

Gorddwy, oppression, transgression; gorddwyo, to press sore, oppress,
trespass.

Gorddwyn, a mallet to drive wood or stone into the ground.

Gorddyar, a sound, a roaring, a bellowing, a noise.

Gorddyfnu, gorddyfnaid, to accustom, habituate.

Gorddygan, harmony.

Goreilid, pressure, burden; goreilitio, to burden.

Gores, gorest, open, waste.

Goresgyn, overrun, subdue.

Goresgynydd, a grandchild’s grandchild.

Goreu, best.

Gorewydd, luxury, lechery.

Gorferw, froth, scum.

Gorflawdd, uproar.

Gorflwng, sullen, churlish.

Gorfod, obligation, necessity; gorfodogaeth, recognizance.

Gorfoleddu, to rejoice.

Gorfyn, rivalry, envy; gorfynnawg, envious.

Gorffen, to end, finish, conclude, make an end, accomplish.

Gorffennaf, July.

Gorffwyll, rags, madness; gorffwyllog, mad, lunatic.

Gorffwyso, to rest, leave off, desist; gorffwysfa, rest, a place of rest,
a desisting.

Gorhewg, bold, saucy.

Gorhoen, joy, mirth.

Goriain, to cry, bawl.

Gorloes, organ.

Gorllewin, west.

Gorllwyn, chase, follow, escort.

Gormail, oppression, conquest.

Gormaint, exhuberant, great.

Gormesu, to trespass, oppress; gormesol, burdensome, oppressive.

Gormod, too much, superfluity.

Gormwyth, heaviness, sadness, grief, perplexity.

Gorne, hue, tint.

Gorober, a feat, excess.

Goror, a coast, confine, edge, brim, border.

Gorsaf, a station.

Gorsedd, a seat, throne, tribunal; gorseddu, to sit; gorseddog,
pertaining to a seat, or throne.

Gorsefyll, to subsist, continue.

Gorsin, a door-post, a door-sill.

Gorthaw, silence.

Gorthir, the highest ground.

Gortho, the roof of a house, building; gorthoi, to thatch, tile, slate.

Gorthorch, a collar, a chain.

Gorthorri, to break, cut off; gorthoriant, a fraction, a breach.

Gorthrech, oppression, extortion, victory, conquest; gorthrechu, to
oppress, overcome.

Gorthrwm, very heavy; gorthrymu, to wax heavy, to afflict, oppress;
gorthrymder, heaviness, affliction, trouble, sorrow.

Gorthywys, leader, prince; point ear of corn.

Goruch, goruwch, above, higher; goruchel, high; goruchaf, highest;
goruchelder, greatness, loftiness; goruchafiaeth, supremacy.

Gorug, he made.

Gorugaw, to overcome, to stifle.

Gorun, higher than, superior.

Gorwaered, gowaered, gwaered, goriwared, a descent, precipice, down-hill.

Gorwag, vain, empty; gorwagedd, gorwacder, vanity; gorwagclod,
vain-glory.

Gorwedd, to lie down; gorweddiad, a lying down.

Gorwy, he overcame; gorwyd, gorfuost, thou hast overcome.

Gorwydd, gorwyddawd, a horse, nag.

Gorwyn, gowyn, somewhat white, gray.

Gorwyrain, to rise, ascend, exalt.

Gorwythawg, angry.

Gorymdaith, to travel.

Gorymddwyn, to comprehend, perceive.

Goryn, a pimple.

Gorysgwr, a pressing, straining, oppression, trespass.

Goryw, gorfu, he overcame, subdued; made, he did.

Gosail, a foundation; goseilio, to lay a foundation.

Gosbaith, polished, translucent.

Goseb, gwoseb, a gift, or present bestowed for holy use.

Gosgedd, a form, figure; gosgeddig, beautiful, handsome, amiable.

Gosgo, oblique, crooked.

Gosgordd, a guard, train, county, shire.

Gosgryn, a trembling.

Gosgymon, tinder, small coal, or anything for the kindling of a fire.

Gosle, goslef, a voice, or tone.

Gosod, to set, lay, place, a statute, constitution, ordinance, an
assault, situation, position; gosodedigaethau, constitutions, laws.

Goson, gentle sound, rumour.

Gosper, evening prayers.

Gosteg, silence; gostegu, to silence; gostegwr, a crier that demands
silence.

Gostwng, to descend, make a curtesy; gostyngiad, humiliation, curtesy.

Gosymddaith, food, victuals; gosymddeithio, to victual, afford provision,
go on progress.

Got, pride; an adultery; gothus, proud.

Gotoyw, a spur.

Gowenu, gwenu, to smile.

Gowni, a basting stitch.

Gra, white cloth.

Gradell, an iron plate to bake cakes upon.

Gradur, a lord.

Gradd, a degree, rank.

Graen, graendde, lamentable, mournful.

Graian, gross sand, gravel.

Graid, a burning, heat.

Graiff, merciful.

Grain, crain, to lie down.

Gramadeg, a grammar; gramadegwr, a grammarian.

Grann, the cheek.

Gras, rhad, rhad Duw, grace; grasol, grasus, grasusol, gracious.

Grawn, _sing_, gronyn, grains, berries.

Grawnwin, eirin gwin, grapes.

Grawys garawys, Lent.

Gre, greon, a herd of horses, or stud of mares; greawr, a herdsman;
grelynn, a pool to water cattle.

Greal, the Sangreal, a cup sought by the knights of Arthur; a certain
historical book now lost, containing various histories.

Greddf, nature, disposition; greddfu, to grow together with one, to be
born with one.

Gregar, to cackle as a hen.

Greilidiaw, to overcome.

Grem, a murmuring, gnashing of the teeth.

Gremial, grymial, scold, murmur, mutter.

Gresaw, welcome.

Gresyn, miserable, pitiable, pitying; gresyndod, pity, compassion;
gresynu, to pity, to commiserate.

Griddfan, to groan, moan, lament; groaning.

Griff, a lord.

Grifft, a tadpole.

Griffwn, a griffin, a man having a crooked nose like a hawk’s bill.

Grill, a noise, a gridiron; grillian, to crack, crash.

Grisial, grisiant, crystal.

Gro, graean, gravel, coarse sand; gronyn, a grain.

Groeg, Greek.

Grudd, a cheek.

Grug, heath, ling; grugiar, a heath-hen.

Grugionyn, mywionyn, an ant, a pismire.

Grut, grud, grit.

Grwgach, grwgnach, to murmur, murmuring.

Grwnn, butt, ridge, land lying between two furrows.

Grwn, groaning, the cooing of a dove.

Grwndwal, a foundation.

Grwyth, grwytho, a murmuring, a making a noise.

Gryd, a conflict, battle.

Grydian, grydwst, to grunt.

Grym, force, strength; grymio, to become strong; grymiol, grymus, strong,
vigorous.

Grymial, ymremial, to scold, murmur, mutter; grymialog, grymialus,
scolding, murmuring.

Gryngian, to gruntle, to mutter.

Gryw, the Greek tongue.

Gwagelyd, to avoid, shun.

Gwachul, somewhat lean.

Gwad, a denial; gwadu, to deny.

Gwadn, sole, bottom; gwadnu, to set soles, to sole.

Gwadd, an earth mole.

Gwaddod, lees, sediment, drugs.

Gwaddol, a dowry.

Gwae, woe.

Gwaed, blood; gwaedu, to bleed; gwaedlyd, bloody; gwaedling, a flux of
blood, bleeding at the nose; gwaederw, the field of blood; gwaed-raidd, a
bloody spear.

Gwaedogen, a tripe, a chitterling.

Gwaedd, a cry, shout; gwaeddi, to cry, shout; gwaeddolef, clamour,
exclamation.

Gwâeg, a buckle, a clasp.

Gwael, vile, ignoble, poor; gwaelbeth, a trifle, of small value.

Gwaelod, a bottom, the dregs; gwaelodi, to bottom, to settle, or grow
thick at the bottom.

Gwaell, gwahell, gwaellbren, a skewer.

Gwaer, rustic, populace.

Gwaesaf, gwaes, arwaesaf, a warrant, help.

Gwaeth, worse; gwaethaf, worst; gwaethu, gwaethygu, to grow worse, to
make worse.

Gwaethl, cywaethl, strife, debate.

Gwag, empty; gwagedd, emptiness; gwaghau, to grow empty.

Gwagelyd, to avoid, shun; gwagelawg, wary, circumspect.

Gwaglwyf, linden, teil-tree.

Gwagonedd, vanity, emptiness.

Gwagr, gogr, a sieve.

Gwagsaw, vain, light, immodest, careless.

Gwahodd, gwahawdd, invitation, to invite.

Gwahan, gwahaniaeth, distinction, separation; gwahanu, to separate,
distinguish; gwahanglwyf, leprosy; gwahanlen, curtain.

Gwahardd, to forbid.

Gwahell, gwaell, a skewer, a knitting-needle.

Gwahennu, gwehynnu, to pour out, empty; gwehynnydd, drawer of water.

Gwain, a sheath, scabbard.

Gwair, hay; gweirio, cyweirio gwair, to make hay; gweirglodd, gwerglodd,
a meadow.

Gwais, gweision, men-servants.

Gwaisg, gwisgi, quick, ready.

Gwaith, work, a time; gweithio, to work; gweithiwr, a workman; gweithred,
a deed, fact, action, act; gweithrediad, working, labouring.

Gwaith-fuddug, a conqueror.

Gwâl, a place littered to lie upon.

Gwâl, Gaul.

Gwal, a wall.

Gwala, enough, sufficiency.

Gwalabr, path.

Gwaladr, a lord.

Gwalaeth, pain, grief.

Gwalc, battlement, a cock in the hat, head of hair.

Gwalch, a hawk.

Gwales, gwely, a bed.

Gwall, defect, want, indigence; gwallawgair, a plaintiff that loseth his
cause by reason of want; gwallofain, penury, need, want; gwallgof,
distracted, insane.

Gwallaw, gwallawf, to draw, to pour out, to serve; gwallofiad,
gwallawfwr, a drawer, butler, tapster.

Gwallt, the hair of the head; gwalltog, hairy.

Gwamal, unstable, wavering, inconstant; gwamalder, inconstancy.

Gwân, a prick, piercing, stab; gwânu, to pierce or run through, prick.

Gwann, weak; gwander, gwendid, weakness; gwanhau, to weaken.

Gwanaf, a row.

Gwanafog, gwynafog, morose, froward, angry.

Gwanar, leader.

Gwanas, stay, support, clasp.

Gwaneg, tonn dwfr, a wave; gwanegu, to spring up, issue out, flow.

Gwanc, voracity, greediness; gwancio, to eat greedily; gwancus, ravenous,
greedy.

Gwanwyn, Spring.

Gwâr, gentle, courteous, tender, mild; gwaredd, clemency, mildness,
tenderness; gwaredigenus, gwareddawg, merciful, tender, mild;
gwareddowgrwydd, gwareidd-dra, clemency; gwarineb, kindness.

Gwarr, the noddle, the nape of the neck; gwarrog, a yoke.

Gwaradwydd, disgrace; gwaradwyddo, to disgrace.

Gwarae, gware, to play.

Gwarafun, gorafun, to grudge, to forbid.

Gwarant, authority, warrant; gwaranrwydd, agreement, assent, witnessing,
avouching.

Gwarchad, to keep at home, to observe; gwarcheidwad, a keeper, guardian;
gwarchodaeth, watch and ward, custody; gwarchae, to shut in, pound;
gwarcheule, a pound for cattle.

Gwared, gwaredu, to deliver, or defend; gwared, gwarediad, deliverance,
redemption; gwaredred, refuge.

Gwargred, residue, leavings.

Gwario, to spend.

Gwarogaeth, homage.

Gwarth, gwarthrudd, disgrace; gwarthau, to disgrace.

Gwarthaf, the top or height, over head; gwarthfor, over sea.

Gwarthafl, gwarthol, a stirrup.

Gwartheg, oxen, cows, neats.

Gwarthflawdd, nimble, quick, swift.

Gwas, a man-servant; gwasaidd, servile; gwasanaeth, service; gwasaneuthu,
to serve; gwasaneuthwr, a man-servant; gwasgwychder, valour, stoutness,
manliness.

Gwasarn, a litter; gwasarnu, to litter.

Gwasg, the waist; gwasgu, to squeeze.

Gwasgar, dispersion, a scattering; gwasgaru, to disperse, spread abroad.

Gwasgod, a shadow; gwasgodi, to shade, to shelter; gwasgawdwydd, the
shade.

Gwasgwyn, hill, horse, Gascony.

Gwasod, a cow that takes a bull.

Gwastad, even, constant; gwastadedd, a plain ground, equity;
gwastadrwydd, constancy; gwastadfod, a constant habitation; gwastadhau,
to make straight or flat; gwastata, to smooth, to fawn.

Gwastraffu, to dissipate, to disperse.

Gwastrawd, a groom, hostler; gwastrawd afwyn, a footman, a page, a
postilion.

Gwatwar, gwatwor, to mock, to scoff at; gwatwargerdd, a laughing-stock, a
scoff, a scurrilous song.

Gwau, to weave; gweydd, gwehydd, gwydd, a weaver.

Gwaudd, a daughter-in-law.

Gwaun, a plain, meadow.

Gwawd, enconium, an elegy, a song of praise; gwawdydd, he that piaiseth
another by word or song.

Gwawl, a light.

Gwawn, the spider’s web, gossamer.

Gwawr, the break of day.

Gwawr, a noble gentleman of excellent virtue.

Gwayw, a stitch, or disease so called.

Gwaywawr, a spearman, a pikeman; gwaywffon, a spear.

Gwden, a withe.

Gwddf, gwddwf, a neck.

Gwddi, a hedging-bill.

Gwe, a web of cloth.

Gweb, face.

Gwecry, weak, feeble.

Gwedi, gwedy, after.

Gwedd, form, likeness, favour, complexion, a team of oxen or horses;
gweddaidd, decent, seemly, handsome, courteous, friendly, familiar;
gweddol, seemly, moderate; gweddig, descent, fair; gweddu, beseem,
submit, do homage.

Gweddi, a prayer; gweddio, to pray.

Gweddill, reliques; to leave or spare.

Gweddw, a widower, widow; gweddwi, to become a widower, or widow.

Gwefl, a blubber lip.

Gwefr, ysdor, rosin, amber.

Gwefus, a lip.

Gwegi, gwagedd, vanity.

Gwegian, to totter.

Gwegil, the nape of the neck; gwegilsyth, stiff-necked.

Gwehelyth, the stock of any tribe, the top of a family.

Gwehilion, refuse, sweepings, the worst of corn.

Gwehydd, gwydd, a weaver.

Gwehyn, emptying, cleaning; gwehynnu, to empty, to pour out.

Gweiddi, to cry.

Gweilgi, the ocean, a stream, a flood.

Gweilging, a bar, perch, staft.

Gweilig, a wine-press.

Gweilydd, gweili, empty, void, voluntary, surplus.

Gweini, to serve, minister; gweinydd, gweiniad, gweinidog, a minister,
one that serveth; gweinidog daiar, a husbandman; gweinidogaeth, ministry.

Gweis, gweision, men-servants.

Gweisgion, the husks, or shells of nuts, or peas.

Gweithon, now.

Gweithred, an action, act, deed, fact.

Gweled, to see; gwelediad, a sight; gweledigaeth, a vision.

Gweli, a wound.

Gwelw, pale.

Gwely, a bed, heritage; gwelyddon, gwelygordd, the stock of a family, the
top of a kin; gwelyfa, gwelyfod, a bed-chamber, a couch.

Gwell, better; gwella, gwellau, to grow better; gwellhad, amendment;
gwellwell, better and better.

Gwellaif, a pair of shears.

Gwellig, gwall, want, defect.

Gwellt, straw.

Gwellyg, gwall, want, need; gwellygiaw, to suffer, want.

Gwellyniawg, prosperous.

Gwên, a smile; gwenu, to smile.

Gwen, _fem. of_ gwyn, fair, a beauty; gwendal, with white forehead.

Gwendid, weakness.

Gwener, Venus; dydd Gwener, Friday.

Gwenfa, genfa, genddalfa, a barnacle to set on a horse’s nose.

Gwenhwyseg, the dialect of Chepstow formerly, now of all South Wales;
Gwenhwyson, the inhabitants of South Wales.

Gweniaith, flattery; gwenheithio, to flatter; gwenheithgar, gwenheithus,
flattering, given to flatter.

Gwenith, wheat.

Gwennol, a swallow; gwennol y gwŷdd, a weaver’s shuttle.

Gwenwisg, a surplice.

Gwenwyn, poison; gwenwyno, to poison; gwenwynig, gwenwynllyd, venomous,
poisonous.

Gwenyg, _pl. of_ gwaneg, waves.

Gwenynen, a bee; gwenynllestr, cwch-gwenyn, a bee-hive; gwenynen ormes, a
drone.

Gwep, wyneb, pig, countenance, face, bill; gwepia, front.

Gwêr, tallow; gwerllyd, tallowish; gweren, a cake, or lump of melted
tallow.

Gwerchyr, a cover.

Gwerdd, _fem. of_ gwyrdd, green; Gwerddon, a green spot.

Gwerddyr, the groin.

Gwerin, the common people; gwerin y wyddbwyll, the tablemen at chess.

Gwerlin, a lord.

Gwern, alder-trees; gwern, gwernlle, a grove of alders, swamp.

Gwernenllestr, the mast of a ship.

Gwers, a while, verse, lesson; gwersig, a little verse or lesson; gwersu,
to versify, repeat verses.

Gwersyll, gwersyllt, a camp, tent.

Gwerth, price, value; gwerthu, to sell; gwerthedigaeth, the sale.

Gwerthefin, supreme.

Gwerthyd, a spindle.

Gweryd, earth cast up.

Gwerdre, land, country.

Gweryru, to neigh.

Gwesgryn, gosgryn, to shake.

Gwest, gwestfa, gwestle, an inn, a lodging; gwestai, lleteuwr, a guest, a
lodger; gwestifiant, a lodging for friends and kinsmen.

Gwestl, gwystl, a pawn, pledge.

Gwestyng, subjection.

Gwesyn, gwas, a man-servant.

Gweus, gwefus, a lip.

Gwewyr, _pl. of_ gwaew, spear; pain, stitch.

Gwg, wrath, anger, frowning.

Gwialen, a rod; _pl._ gwial or gwiail; gwialennod, a whipping.

Gwib, a wandering; gwibio, to wander, go astray; gwibiad, gwibiadr,
gwibddyn, a vagabond.

Gwiber, a viper.

Gwich, gwichian, a squealing, a squeaking; gwichio, to squeak.

Gwichiad, periwinkle.

Gwichet, a back door, postern gate.

Gwiddon, a witch, sorceress, giantess.

Gwif, an iron bar.

Gwifr, a wire.

Gwig, gwigfa, a grove, or wood; gwigyn, one that lives in the wood.

Gwingo, to kick, to spurn, winch, or flinch; gwingog, winching, spurning,
kicking.

Gwil, gwilff, gwilog, a mare.

Gwilio, gwyllo, to watch.

Gwilwst, a mare.

Gwill, gwilliad, a lurker, a night thief; gwillmor, a pirate.

Gwimpl, a wimple, a kind of veil, or covering.

Gwin, wine; gwinwydd, vines; gwinllan, a vineyard; gwingafn, gwinsang,
gwinwryf, a wine-press.

Gwinau, bay coloured.

Gwinegr, vinegar.

Gwintas, high shoes.

Gwipia, llymysten, a sparrow-hawk.

Gwir, true; gwiredd, gwirionedd, truth; gwirio, to verify, assert.

Gwirion, innocent, guiltless; gwiriondeb, gwirionedd, innocence, truth.

Gwirod, liquor; wassail.

Gwisg, a dress, apparel; gwisgo, to dress, deck; gwisgad, a dress;
gwisgadur, a dresser.

Gwisgi, expedite.

Gwisgio, to shell nuts; cnau gwisgi, brown or ripe nuts.

Gwiw, worthy, fitting; gwiwdab, a dignity, pertinacy, a purpose.

Gwiwair, a squirrel.

Gwiwne, gne, colour.

Gwlad, a country; gwladaidd, gwledig, gwladog, country like, rustic,
homely, bashful; gwladeiddio, gwladyddu, to blush; gwladeidddra,
gwladeiddrwydd, clownishness, rusticity, bashfulness; gwladwr, a
country-man; gwladychu, gwladyddu, to reign, to stay in a country;
gwledych, reign, government; gwleiddiadon, country people, of the same
country; gwledig, a ruler.

Gwlan, wool; gwlanen, flannel.

Gwledig, a king, a peer.

Gwledd, a feast, a banquet; gwledda, to feast.

Gwlf, gwlw, the notch of an arrow, the nib of a pen.

Gwlith, dew; gwlitho, to dew; gwlithen, a felon, or whitlow.

Gwlyb, gwlybwr, wet; glybyrog, wettish; gwlychu, to wet, moisten.

Gwlydd, mild, gentle, tender.

Gwlŷdd, stem, stalk.

Gwmon, seaweed.

Gŵn, a gown.

Gwnn, I know.

Gwnn, a gun.

Gwnedd, dignity, honour.

Gwneuthur, to do, make, commit; gwneddyw, gwnaddoedd, gwnaeth, he made,
he has done.

Gwni, gwniad, a seam, sewing; gwnio, to sew; gwniadur, a thimble;
gwniedydd, a sewer, stitcher; gwniedyddes, a seampstress.

Gwnnod, gwynnod, white, whiteness.

Gwnnon, gwynnon, pillwyddon, dry ash cut in splinters.

Gwobr, reward.

Gwosol, trace, vestige.

Gwp, the bill of a bird.

Gŵr, a man, husband; gwra, to seek, or marry a husband; gŵr pwys, a
bridegroom; gwrol, manly, valiant; gwroliaeth, manliness, valour; gwraf,
most valiant, most manly; gwriawr, gwrol, manly; gwrheu, to surrender
himself, make homage, promise fealty; gwriogaeth, homage; gwrial, to play
the man.

Gwrab, an ape.

Gwrach, an old woman; gwrach y lludw, kitchen bob, a wood-louse;
gwrachiaidd, like an old woman, doting.

Gwradwydd, gwaradwydd, a reproach; gwradwyddo, to reproach.

Gwragen, any thing that bends like a bow, a curved handle.

Gwraig, a wife; gwraig pwys, a bride; gwreica, to seek, or marry a wife;
gwreignith, a pretty little wife.

Gwraidd, roots; gwreiddio, to take root, to be rooted.

Gwran do, gwrandaw, to hear, to hearken.

Gwrcath, a he-cat.

Gwrda, a good man, a noble man; gwrdaeth, nobleness.

Gwrdd, stout, strong.

Gwregys, a girdle; gwregysu, to gird.

Gwreng, vulgar, common; gwrengyn, a mean man.

Gwreichion, sparks; gwreichioni, to sparkle.

Gwreinyn, gwraint, a worm in the hand, ringworm.

Gwres, heat; gwresog, hot; gwresog, to wax hot.

Gwrhyd, gwryd, a fathom.

Gwrhydri, heroism, manliness.

Gwrîd, blushes, flushes; gwrido, to blush; gwridog, with cherry cheeks,
red cheeks.

Gwringell, a sudden motion, slice, chip; gwringellu, to move often.

Gwriog, a married woman.

Gwrm, gwrwm, dark grey.

Gwrwmdde, a mourning dress.

Gwrogaeth, homage.

Gwron, a hero.

Gwrtaith, dung, marl.

Gwrth, by, against; gwrthwyneb, contrarywise; gwrth-ddywedyd, to
contradict; gwrthgri, a contradiction; gwrth-Grist, anti-Christ;
gwrthiaith, contradiction.

Gwrthafl, gwarthol, a stirrup.

Gwrth-hoel, gwrthaing, a wedge.

Gwrthban, a blanket.

Gwrthbwyth, like for like.

Gwrthdir, upland, wild land.

Gwrth-drennydd, day before yesterday.

Gwrtheb, to answer.

Gwrthferu, to restore.

Gwrthfyn, to receive.

Gwrthgrwydr, a straying about.

Gwrthladd, to resist; resistance.

Gwrthmin, with crooked point.

Gwrthneu, to refuse, reject.

Gwrthnysig, refractory, obstinate; gwrthnysigrwydd, obstinacy.

Gwrthod, to refuse.

Gwrthol, backwards, retrograde.

Gwrthrawd, army of enemies.

Gwrthred, a running backwards.

Gwrthrin, gwrthryfel, rebellion.

Gwrthrych, an image, effigy.

Gwrthryn, to resist, resistance.

Gwrthun, deformed, ugly; gwrthuni, ugliness; gwrthuno, to disfigure.

Gwrthwyneb, against; gwrthwynebu, to oppose.

Gwrych, bristles; gwrych y cae, beard of a hedge; gwrychio, to raise up
the bristles.

Gwrydd, wreath.

Gwrygio, to grow, become strong or vigorous.

Gwrym, a seam, a weal; gwrymio, to make seams.

Gwrym, grymus, strong, valiant.

Gwrŷs, strife; gwrysio, to strive.

Gwrysg, gwrysgen, boughs, a bough.

Gwrysgryn, a trembling.

Gwryw, male.

Gwst, disease, sickness.

Gwth, a thrust, push; gwthio, to push.

Gwyach, a sea-bird.

Gwyar, blood; gwyarllyd, bloody.

Gwybed, flies.

Gwybod, to know; gwybodaeth, knowledge; gwybodus, knowing; gwybodydd,
prophet; gwybyddiad, eye-witness.

Gwych, neat, fine, healed; gwychder, gaiety, valour.

Gwychr, cheerful, courageous.

Gwŷd, vice, sin; gwydio, to sin; gwydus, vicious.

Gwydn, tough; gwydnedd, toughness; gwydnhau, to wax tough.

Gwydr, glass; gwydro, to glaze; gwydrwr, a glazier; gwydrol, glassy, like
glass.

Gŵydd, pasture ground that has been formerly ploughed; gwyddo, to rest
land, or leave it unploughed.

Gŵydd, a goose.

Gŵydd, presence.

Gŵydd, wood; gwydden, tree.

Gŵydd, a weaver’s loom; gŵydd, gwehydd, a weaver.

Gwyddbwyll, gwyddbwll, chess.

Gwyddel, an Irishman; Gwyddelig, Irish; Gwyddeleg, the Irish language.

Gwyddfa, a tomb, monument.

Gwyddfil, gwyddlwdn, a wild beast.

Gwyddgŵn, young wolves, or foxes.

Gwyddi, gwddi, a hedge-hill; gwyddi, gwydding, a hedge.

Gwyddwal, gwyddweli, gwyddeli, bushes.

Gwyddwydd, gwyddfid, llysiau’r mêl, honeysuckle.

Gwyfyn, a moth.

Gŵyl, swil, bashful; gwyledd, gwylder, bashfulness.

Gŵyl, a holy day, a fast; gwylmabsant, patron saint day.

Gwylan, a sea-gull, or sea-mew.

Gwylio, to watch, to expect, to wait, to beware; gwylfa, a watch;
gwyliadwriaeth, watchfulness; gwyliadwrus, watchful; gwylnos, a
watchnight with the dead.

Gwyll, a hag, goblin, ghost.

Gwyll, darkness, dark, dusky; gwyll y nos, dusk; gwyll, the shade or
darkness of trees.

Gwyllon, shades, phantoms.

Gwyllt, wild; gwylltineb, wildness, madness; gwylltio, to grow wild, to
make wild.

Gwymon, gwmon, sea-weed, weed.

Gwymp, fair, beautiful.

Gwŷn, lust, pain, trouble; gwynio, to torment, pain, grieve, anguish.

Gwyndodig, Venedotian.

Gwynn, white; gwynder, whiteness; gwynnu, to whiten; gwynn y llygad, the
white of the eye; gwynn wy, the white of an egg; gwynias, white-hot;
gwynfyd, bliss.

Gwyndwn, gwyndonn, gwndwn, laid-ground, or land never ploughed.

Gwynfyd, blessedness, happiness; gwynfydu, to envy; gwynfydedig, blessed,
happy; gwynfydedigrwydd, blessedness.

Gwyniad, a whiting.

Gwynedd, Venedotia, North-west Wales, North Wales.

Gwyniar, wind.

Gwyngen, smiling, a smile.

Gwynygiaw, to wax clear, shine, appear.

Gwynt, wind; gwyntog, windy.

Gŵyr, crooked, warped; gwyro, to warp.

Gwyrain, a kind of goose.

Gwyran, hay, the latter crop.

Gwyrdd, green.

Gwyrennig, lively, florid.

Gwyrn, maggots.

Gwyros, privet.

Gwyrth, miracle.

Gwyryf, gwyrf, fresh, new, virgin; gwyryfdawd, virginity.

Gwyryng, lice, worms that oxen breed.

Gwŷs, invitation; gwysio, to invite, summon.

Gwŷs, gwyddys, ’tis known.

Gwystl, a pledge, a pawn; gwystlo, to pledge, to pawn; gwystleidiaeth,
gwystloraeth, a pledge, or pawn.

Gwystn, feeble, weak; gwystno, to grow feeble, or weak.

Gŵyth, gwythawd, gwythlonedd, gwythaint, anger, wrath; gwythawg,
gorwythawg, angry, wrathful.

Gwythen, a vein; gwythennog, gwythennus, full of veins.

Gwyw, faded, withered.

Gyda, with.

Gyfarystlys, sideways.

Gyferbyn, over against.

Gylf, gylfin, the bill of a bird; gylfinhir, a curlew.

Gylfant, a snout.

Gynneu, a little while ago.

Gynifio, to bellow, or low.

Gynt, of old, in times past.

Gyrr, a drove; gyrfa, a race; gyrfeydd, runner of a race, a post,
letter-carrier; gyriad, a course, a forcing, or driving; gyrru, to drive,
to compel.

Gyrthiaw, to push, or butt like a ram; gyrth, driven, beaten.

Gysp, the staggers.



H.


Ha! there; well done.

Habrsiwn, a coat of mail.

Hacnai, steed, ambler.

Hacru, to become ugly.

Had, seed; hadu, to bring forth seed.

Hadef, setting, going down.

Hadl, ruinous, decayed, rotten, corrupted; hadlu, to wax rotten; hadledd,
rottenness, corruption.

Haddef, a home, habitation.

Haeach, hayach, almost, well nigh.

Haearn, hayarn, iron; haearnu, to iron; haearnaidd, like iron.

Haeddel, the plough handle.

Haeddu, deserve; haeddedigaeth, haeddiant, merit, desert.

Hael, liberal, bountiful; haelder, haeledd, haelioni, liberality,
munificence; haelbyrllawiog, prodigal, lavish.

Haen, a fold, layer, wrinkle.

Haerllug, importunate, saucy, impudent; haerllugrwydd, importunity;
haeru, to affirm, to assert.

Haf, summer; hafaidd, lightsome, summer-like, pleasant; hafar, branar
haf, land fallowed in summer; hafgan, summer song, a May song; hafdy, a
summer-house.

Hafarch, not strong, listless.

Hafal, like, equal.

Haflug, abundance, plenty.

Hafn, a haven, a port.

Hafod, hafoty, a summer’s dwelling, a dairy-house; hafodwr, a dairy-man,
an upland caretaker.

Hafog, devastation.

Hafr, hyfr, a he-goat that is gelded.

Hafren, the Severn.

Hafflau, lap, grasp.

Hagen, yet, nevertheless, truly.

Hagr, ugly, ill-favoured; hagrwch, hagrwydd, ugliness.

Haha, well done.

Hai, hasten!

Haid, a swarm.

Haidd, barley.

Haig, a shoal.

Hail, minister at the table, waiting at table; heilio, to minister,
serve.

Haint, a disease, evil; heinus, heinllyd, diseased, sickly.

Halawg, halog, defiled, polluted; halogi, to defile.

Hald, a trotting; haldian, to trot, shake, jog.

Halen, salt; hallt, salty, powdered; halltu, to salt; halltedd, helltni,
halltineb, saltness.

Haliw, saliva, spittle.

Hamdden, deliberation, leisure.

Hanbwyllo, to make mention, remember.

Handid, hanfydded, bydded, let it be; handoedd, hanoedd, it has been, it
was; handyfydd, hanffydd, it will be; handym, we are; hanyw, henyw, ie,
ydiw, yw, is; hanbych, hanpych, henffych, let it be so; henffych, well,
hail, health.

Hanfod, essence, being, to be, exist.

Hanes, an intelligence, account, history.

Hanner, half; haneru, to divide in the middle.

Hannu, to descend from.

Hapus, happy.

Hardd, seemly, handsome, decent; harddu, to adorn, beautify, dress;
harddwch, comeliness, decency, neatness.

Hau, to sow.

Haul, the sun; heulo, a sunning, a setting, in the sun; heulrhod, a hat,
a cap, periwig, bongrace.

Hawd, course, sweep of a sword.

Hawdd, easy to do; hawddfyd, comfort.

Hawdd amor, welcome!

Hawg, awhile, for some time.

Hawl, an action, claim to a thing; hawlwr, holwr, a plaintiff.

Hayach, almost, well nigh.

He, heu, hau, to sow.

Hear, hyar, easy to be ploughed, arable, plain.

Heb, eb, ebyr, saith he, said she.

Heb, without, destitute of.

Hebgor, to omit, spare.

Hebog, hawg, a hawk, falcon; hebogydd, a falconer.

Heboir = heb ohir, forthwith, without delay.

Hebrwng, hebrwn, to accompany some part of the way; hebryngiad, a guide.

Hedeg, ehedeg, to fly; hedion, chaff; hedydd, a lark; hediad, ehediad, a
flight.

Hedd, heddwch, heddychawd, peace, tranquility; heddychu, to pacify, to
make peace; heddychol, peaceable.

Heddyw, heddiw, to-day, this day.

Hefelydd, elfydd, like, similar; hefelychu, to imitate.

Hefis, a smock.

Hefyd, also, likewise.

Hegl, a leg; hegl gam, the plough handle.

Heng, haing, an interjection of threatening.

Heiblo, besides, by.

Heilio, to offer sacrifice; to serve.

Heiliog, head, capital of column.

Heinif, heini, hoenus, cheerful, brisk.

Heiniar, heniar, provision of corn.

Heisan, heisyllt, hessyllt, rhesyllt, a hatchel; heisanu, to hatchel
flax, hemp, or cotton.

Hel, to gather, collect; heliad, a gathering, collection.

Hela, to hunt; helwriaeth, a hunting.

Helaeth, ehelaeth, spacious, large, plentiful; helaethrwydd, plenty,
abundance; helaethu, to amplify, enlarge.

Helbul, trouble, adversity, afflictions; helbulus, full of troubles.

Helcyd, helgud, to hunt often.

Heldrin = helbul.

Heledd, saltpit, saltpan; heli, brine, dissolved salt.

Helm, helmet, head-piece; helmog, that wears a helmet.

Hely, hela, to hunt.

Helyg, willow trees.

Helynt, a course, or condition of life.

Hen, old, ancient; henaint, old age; heneidd-dra, agedness; henefydd,
henydd, a councillor, alderman, elder; hendad, a forefather; hendaid, the
great grandfather; hendref, abode, winter home.

Henfon, a milch cow.

Heniâr, a provision of corn, crop.

Heno, henoeth, this night.

Henuriad, an elder.

Henw, enw, a name; henwi, enwi, to name.

Heol, buarth, ffordd fawr, a street, a court before a house.

Hepcor, to spare, reserve.

Hepian, to nod, slumber, take a nap.

Hercyd, to reach, extend.

Heretic, dyn cyndyn yn neilltuo oddiwrth yr Ysgrythyr a chyfraith y
deyrnas, a heretic.

Herddyll, handsome, beautiful.

Hergod, a lump, paunch.

Hergwd, a push, shove.

Heri, a lame leg; a limp.

Herlod, a little boy, a lad; herlodyn, an infant, little boy; herlodes, a
little girl.

Herod, an ambassador, a herald at arms; herodraeth, neges, embassy,
negotiation.

Herr, a challenge.

Herw, herwa, to ramble, fly from place to place; herwlong, llong
gwylliaid, a pirate ship; herwr, a runagate, fugitive; herwriaeth, a
running away.

Herwm, the gloss of leather.

Herwth, a gut.

Herwydd, for, because of.

Hesg, sedge-bushes, flags.

Hesglif, a long, or two-handed saw.

Hesp, hysp, dried up, not giving milk.

Hespen, a hasp.

Hespin, an ewe-lamb of a year old; hespwrn, a he-lamb of a year old.

Het, a hat.

Hetys, a piece, an instant.

Heulor, a manger, rack.

Heulrhod, a hat, a glory, halo.

Heusor, a herdsman, a tender of cattle.

Hi, hithau, she.

Hidl, a strainer; hidlo, to strain.

Hiddygl, huddygl, soot.

Hifio, to pluck off wool, to make bare.

Hifflaid, to flow.

Hil, hepll, off-spring, progeny, lineage, posterity; hilio, hepilio, to
multiply, or increase; hiliogaeth, off-spring, progeny.

Hin, weather, air; hindda, good weather, dry weather; hinon, fair
weather, dry weather; hinoni, to clear up.

Hiniog, rhiniog, a threshold, sill.

Hir, long; hirder, longitude, length; hiriaint, delay, prolonging of
time; hirio, to prolong, delay, lengthen; hiroeddlus, hirhoedlog,
long-lived.

Hiraeth, a longing for a thing; hiraethog, longing; hiraethu, to long.

Hirlan, climach hir o ddyn, a tall slim fellow.

Hiriell, gleam, angel.

Hirwst, perseverance.

Hirwlydd, mild, gentle, tender.

Hislau, sheep’s lice.

Hispydd, hysp, barren, dried up.

Hob, hobeu, swine.

Hôb, hobaid, a bushel.

Hobel, a bird, arrow; hobelu, to hop, leap.

Hoced, fraud, deceit; hocedydd, a deceiver.

Hocrell, geneth fechan, a little girl; hocrellwr, an adulterer.

Hoed = hiraeth.

Hoeden, a giddy girl.

Hoedl, life, time of life; hoedlog, long-lived; hoedli, to live long.

Hoel, a nail; hoelio, to nail.

Hoen, gladness, pleasantness; hoenus, glad, merry, pleasant.

Hoenyn, hwynyn, rhownyn, the hair of the tail.

Hoewal, hoewel, slow water.

Hoff, delightful; hoffi, to delight in, to love; hoffedd, delight, love.

Hog, hogyn, a stripling; hogen, a lass, maid.

Hogi, to whet; hogfaen, hogalen, ygalen, a whetstone.

Holi, to examine, to question.

Holl, the whole, all; Hollalluog, Almighty.

Hollt, a cleft, split, crag; hollti, to cleave, split.

Hon, this female; honno, that female.

Honcian, to wag, stir.

Honffest, a petticoat.

Honnaid, known, famous; honni, to publish, assert.

Honos, a tall lanky man.

Honsel, a hand sail.

Hopran, a mill-hopper.

Hôr, horen, horod, swine lice.

Hort, a nick-name, a false accusation; hortio, to revile, detract,
reproach.

Hosan, a stocking.

Hospyty, elusendy, a hospital.

Hot, hotan, a hat, cap.

Hoyw, pretty, neat, sprightly.

Hu, a cap.

Huad, a hound.

Hual, a fetter; hualu, to fetter; hualawg, fettered; huelydd, fetterer.

Huan, the sun.

Huc, hug, hugan, a cloak, also a covering.

Hucan, gwylan lwyd, a sea mew, cob, gull.

Hud, hudolaeth, delusion; hudo, to entice, delude; hudol, deceitful;
hudoliaeth, delusion; hudlath, a juggler’s wand, or rod.

Hudnwy, hwyad, a duck.

Hudwg, hugwd, a scare-crow.

Huddo, to cover, overspread.

Huddygl, soot; huddyglyd, sooty.

Hufen, cream; hufennu, to cream, skim.

Hufyll, humble; hufylltod, humility.

Hug, hugan, a cloak, a covering.

Hugl groen, rhugl-groen, a rattle, to frighten horses, &c.

Hulio, to deck, cover.

Human, humig, humog, a tennis ball; humanydd, a tennis player.

Hun, slumber, little nap; huno, to sleep, slumber; hundy, a bed-chamber;
hunlle, hunllef, the night mare; hungos, a clawing, or scratching in a
sleep.

Hun, hunan, self.

Hupynt, a brunt, a sudden assault.

Hur, a reward, wages, hire; huriaw, to reward.

Hurt, stupid, mopish; hurtio, to stupify; hurthgen, a stupid man.

Hurtr, a boarded floor.

Husting, hustyng, to whisper.

Hwch, a sow.

Hwde, take thou.

Hwf, a hood, a cowl.

Hwn, this; hwnnw, that.

Hwnt, beyond, far away; hwntian, to wander.

Hwp, an attempt, enterprise.

Hwrdd, myharen, a ram; hwrdd, a jostling, thrusting; hyrddu, hyrddio, to
thrust.

Hwre = hwde.

Hwrwg, a little swelling, a lump.

Hŵs, a horse-cloth.

Hwsmon, a husbandman, a thriftyman; hwsmonnaeth, husbandry, thriftiness.

Hwstr, morose, froward, hwstredd, frowardness.

Hwt, fie, fie away, get thee hence; hwtio, to hiss out.

Hwy, longer, more tedious; hwyhâu, to lengthen; hwyedig, prolonged.

Hwy, hwynt, hwynt-hwy, they, them.

Hwyad, a duck.

Hwyfell, a salmon.

Hwyl, health, disposition of body.

Hwyl, taith, a progress, sail; hwylbren, mast; hwylio, to direct; hwylus,
right, apt, dexterous; hwylwynt, a prosperous wind.

Hwynyn, hoenyn, rhawnyn, the hair of an ox or horse’s tail.

Hwyr, late; hwyrhau, to grow late; hwyrdrwm, slow, heavy; hwyrfrydig,
slow.

Hy-, -able.

Hy, bold; hydeb, hyfder, boldness; hyder, trust, confidence, dependence;
hyderu, to trust, to confide; hyderus, adventurous, audacious, confident.

Hyar, hear, easy to be ploughed.

Hyawdl, eloquent; hyawdledd, eloquence, readiness in speaking.

Hybarch, honoured, revered.

Hyblyg, flexible, apt to bend, tractable; hyblygedd, flexibility.

Hyborth, easy to feed.

Hybred, hybryd, neat, handsome.

Hybu, to prohibit, doubt.

Hybwyll, prudent.

Hychgrug, quinsy.

Hyd, length; hyd at, to.

Hydawdd, that may be melted.

Hydr, bold, stout, valiant.

Hydraeth, that may be declared; anhydraeth, that cannot be declared.

Hydraidd, penetrable.

Hydraul, easily worn out.

Hydref, October.

Hydrefn, well-ordered.

Hydrum, free.

Hydwf, a growing youth or plant.

Hydwyll, apt to be deceived.

Hydyn, tractable, easy.

Hydd, hyddgan, a deer, buck; hyddgen, the skin of a red or fallow deer.

Hyddaif, easily singed.

Hyddal, easy to comprehend.

Hyddawn, liberal, bountiful.

Hyddellt, easily slit or cloven.

Hyddestl, delicate.

Hyddfre, hydfref, October.

Hyddyn, populous.

Hyddysg, teachable.

Hyfaeth, easily nourished.

Hyfed, easy to reap.

Hyfriw, easily broken.

Hyfryd, pleasant; hyfrydwch, pleasantness.

Hyffordd, skilful, dexterous, passable; hyfforddi, to direct.

Hygar, amiable, lovely; hygaredd, amiableness, piety.

Hygawdd, easily offended.

Hyglod, famous.

Hyglyd, easy to carry.

Hygno, easily chewed.

Hygoel, credible.

Hygryn, trembling.

Hygwymp, apt to fall.

Hygyrch, accessible.

Hyhud, easily deceived.

Hylaw, dexterous.

Hylithr, apt to slide.

Hylosg, combustible, easily burnt.

Hylwgr, corruptible.

Hylwybr, expert, tractable.

Hylwydd prosperous, fortunate.

Hylyn, sticky, tenacious.

Hyll, horrid, cruel, ugly; hyllu, to disfigure; hylldrawn, to put in a
fright; hylldrem, a cruel aspect, hylldremio, to look wildly.

Hyn, thus much.

Hynny, that, that much.

Hŷn, older.

Hynefydd, senator, elder.

Hynaws, mild, tender; hynawsedd, meekness, mildness.

Hynod, notable, remarkable.

Hynt, journey.

Hyrddu, to ram.

Hyson, loud, shrill.

Hysp, barren, dried up.

Hyspys, certain, sure; hyspysu, to certify, manifest.

Hyswi, a housewife, a thrifty woman; hwswiaeth, good house-wifery,
thrift.

Hytrach, rather.

Hytynt, journey, course, race; hytynt y dwfr, water-course.

Hywedd, tame, accustomed to the yoke; hyweddu, to tame, to pacify.

Hywen, apt to smile.

Hywerth, vendible, easy to be sold.

Hywiw, very worthy.

Hylwydd, mild, tender.

Hywredd, manliness.

Hywystl, easy to be pawned or pledged.



I.


I, To.

I, me.

Ia, ice.

Iach, _pl._ iachau, a pedigree.

Iach, sound, healthy; iachâu, to heal; iachawdwr, iachaid, a saviour;
iachawdwriaeth, salvation; iachus, wholesome, healthy.

Iad, the top of the head, pate.

Iaen, a little piece of ice.

Iaeth, rhewlyd, icy.

Iangwr, eangwr, a rustic.

Iaith, a language.

Iâr, a hen; iâr orllyd, a hen that sits on eggs; iâr wynt, the bird of
paradise; iâr goed, iâr wydd, a pheasant.

Iarll, an earl, or count; iarlles, a countess; iarllaeth, an earldom.

Iarnadd, oddiarnodd, above.

Iâs, a boiling, bubbling; violent cold.

Iasu = asio, to join.

Iau, younger; ieuaf, youngest.

Iau, a yoke; ieuo, to yoke; ieuawr, ieuog, yoked.

Iau, Jupiter.

Iawl, a prayer.

Iawn, just, right, lawful; iawnder, equity, justice; iawnweddawg, right
and just.

Id = yd.

Iddew, Iuddew, a Jew.

Iddo, to him, to himself.

Iddwf, tân iddwf, St. Anthony’s fire, erisypelas.

Ie, yes, yea.

Iechyd, health.

Ieithydd, linguist, interpreter.

Ien, cold; ienhau, to wax cold.

Ierthi, irai, a goad to drive oxen or cattle with.

Ierwydd, a heath hen.

Iesin, fair, beautiful.

Iesu, Jesus.

Ieuanc, iefanc, ifanc, young; iau, ieuangach, iengach, younger;
ieuengtyd, youth, younger years.

Iewaint, ieuaint, ieuengtyd, youth, youthful age.

Iewais, I heard, I found, I had.

Igian, to yex, or hiccough, the hiccough.

Ing, yngder, cyfing, cyfyngder, anguish, agony, misery, also narrow,
strait.

Ill, illdau, illdeuwedd, both.

Imp, impyn, a graft, a plant; impio, to graft, or plant.

Insel, a seal.

Ioli, to pray; iolwch, thanksgiving, prayer.

Iolwrch, glass; wood.

Iôn, the Lord, Jehovah.

Iôr, the Lord, governor.

Iorth, eorth, studious, diligent; iorthryn, diligence.

Ir, green, fresh, sappy; irder, ireidd-der, greenness.

Irad, bitter, raging, terrible.

Irai, ire, a goad, or rod to drive oxen, or horses.

Iraid, grease; ireiddlyd, greasy; iro, to grease, besmear.

Iraidd, fresh, smooth, polished; ireiddio, to polish, to adorn, make
smooth and fresh.

Irdang, irdanc, astonishment, amazement, insensibleness; irdangu, to
stupify, to make senseless.

Irllawn, angry, wrathful; irllonedd, iredd, anger, displeasure.

Is, lower, inferior; isel, humble, low; iselu, to humble, bring down;
isder, iselder, humility; isaf, the lowest, meanest, most base.

Isamer, a squire, an armour-bearer.

Isarn, a halbert.

Isgell, browes, broth.

Isgîl, wrth ysgîl, behind on horseback; isgilio, to ride behind one on
the same horse.

Isop, hyssop.

Iwrch carw, a roe-buck; iyrches, ewig, a roe.



L.


Lab, a stroke, blow, stripe.

Lafrwyn, llafrwyn, bulrushes.

Lamp, canwyll, a lamp.

Larwm, an alarm.

Latwm, latten, or copper metal.

Lefain, leaven.

Lifrai, lifre, livery.

Lindys, caterpillar.

Lwfer, a chimney.



Ll.


Lla, llaw, a hand.

Llabi, llabwst, a booby.

Llabir, a sword.

Llabyddio, to stone, beat with stones.

Llac, loose, slack, sickly; llacâu, to slacken, grow loose, to droop,
decline.

Llachar, glittering, shining.

Llâd, grace, gift, benefit, goodness.

Lladin, Latin; Lladinydd, a Latinist; lladmer, lladmerydd, an
interpreter; lladmeru, to interpret.

Lladrad, theft, robbery; lladrata, to steal, rob.

Lladd, to cut, kill, slay; lladdfa, a slaughter; lleiddiad, lladdwr, a
slayer, killer.

Llaes, deep towards the ground; llaesu, to let down lower; llaesder, the
depth.

Llaesodr, llaesod, litter for cattle to lie upon.

Llaeth, milk; llaeth torr, the first milk; llaetha, to beg milk;
llaethog, milky.

Llafar, a vowel, a voice; llafaru, to speak, make a noise.

Llafasu, to dare; llafasus, daring.

Llafn, a blade of a knife, sword, &c.

Llafrwyn, bulrushes.

Llafur, work, labour, study, business; llafurio, to labour, work, play
the husbandman, till the ground; llafurus, laborious; llafurwr, a
husbandman.

Llai, less.

Llai, a brown colour.

Llaib, llyfiad, a licking, lapping; lleibio, llepian, to lick, lap.

Llaid, clay, dirt, mud; a disease on the feet of cattle.

Llaig, bubble.

Llaill, others, the rest.

Llain, lleinell, a narrow piece.

Llain, a sword, a sword-blade.

Llais, a voice, sound; lleisio, to sound, make a noise.

Llaith, moist, wet.

Llaith, death.

Llall, the other.

Llallog, llallawg, honour.

Llallogan, a back-biting.

Llam, a leap, stride; llamu, to leap, stride; llamsach, to jump, hop,
skip, dance; llamsachus, full of leaping and dancing.

Llamdwyo, to carry a thing from place to place.

Llamfa, llamfforch, a style.

Llamhidydd, a lobster, crawfish, a rope-dancer; llamhidyddiaeth, a
gesturing, dancing.

Llamprai, llysowen, an eel, a lampril.

Llann, a church, or temple, churchyard, yard.

Llannerch, a distinct place, or piece of ground.

Llanestr, llanastr, desolation; ar lanastr, scatteringly; llanastru, to
waste, to disperse.

Llanw, fulness; llanw’r môr, sea-flood.

Llariaidd, mild, gentle, tender.

Llarp, a rag, a rent piece; llarpio, to tear in pieces.

Llary, llariaidd, mild, gentle; llaryaf llareiddiaf, mildest, meekest,
gentlest; llaryedd, meekness, gentleness.

Llas, was slain.

Llasar, blue azure.

Llaswyr, the psalter, psalms.

Llatai, a messenger between two lovers; llateirwydd, llateiaeth, messages
between lovers.

Llath, a rod, perch, or pole to measure timber or land with; llathen, a
yard, containing three feet; llath, llathen, llathaid, a yard long, or
one yard in length.

Llathlud, a violent taking away of women, a rape.

Llathr, llathraidd, lank, smooth; llathru, to shine, to glitter.

Llau, lice.

Llaw, a hand; llaw-egor, a liberal hand.

Llawch, llochi, a gentle entreating, or handling.

Llawd, llodig, a sow is so termed when she seeks a boar.

Llawdr, a pair of breeches.

Llawdwn, llaw tan anaf, a lame, maimed hand.

Llawdd, praise, pleasure.

Llawddeawg, dexterous.

Llawen, joyful, merry; llawenydd, joy, gladness, mirth; llawenu,
llawenhau, llawenychu, to rejoice, to be merry.

Llawer, llaweroedd, many.

Llawes, a sleeve.

Llawethair, llawethyr, llyffethair, fetters.

Llawethan, llywethan, llysywen, an eel.

Llawgair, an oath.

Llawlyw, hegl gam aradr, a plough-tail, or handle.

Llawn, full; llawn lleuad, a full moon; llawnllonaid, full moon.

Llawr, a floor, the face of the earth; llawrfaes, a plot of ground.

Llawrodd, wages for work.

Llawrwydd, laurel.

Llawrydd, llofrudd, a murderer, a man-slayer; llawruddiawg,
bloody-handed, bloody-minded; llawruddiaeth, a murder.

Lle, a place.

Lleas, death, a slaughter.

Lleawdr, lleawr, a reader.

Lleban, a clown; llebanaidd, rustic, clownishly.

Llech, a stone; llech bobi, a baking-stone; llech, neu bwrdd carreg, a
stone-table; llech-lafar, adlais carreg, an echo from rocks or stones.

Llech, a covert, or hiding-place; llechu, to hide one’s self; llechwedd,
the side of a hill.

Lled, latitude, or breadth; lledu, to make wider, to grow wider.

Lled, somewhat; lled-wirion, somewhat simple.

Lledach, of an ignoble lineage, or descent.

Lledcynt, wrath, anger.

Lledchwelan, scattered, divided.

Lledechwyrth, foolish, rude.

Lleden, plaice.

Lledewigwst, hæmorrhoides, piles.

Lledfegyn, any wild creature that is tamed.

Lledfen, flat, sprawling.

Lledfryd, lledfrydedd, dotage, folly.

Lledffed, uwdffon, mopbren, a ladle.

Lledffer, somewhat strong.

Llediaith, corrupt and defiled speech, barbarism.

Lledlef, an imperfect word.

Llednais, modest; lledneisrwydd, modesty.

Llednoeth, somewhat naked or bare.

Lledpai, askew, awry, oblique, unstable; lledpelo, to decay, decline;
lledpeirwydd, declining, the steepness or shelving of a hill.

Lledpen, the side of the head.

Lledr, lleder, leather; lledrin, of leather, or of a hide; lledryn, a
little piece of leather.

Lledrith, lledrud, a phantasy, hypocrisy; lledrithiog, full of deceitful
tricks.

Lledryw, baseness of birth, ignobleness.

Lledw, wealthy, rich.

Lledŵg, some anger.

Lledwydd, unfruitful trees.

Lleddf, oblique, awry, askew, warped; lleddfu, to warp, grow crooked.

Lleen, llen, to read; lleenawg, literate, learned.

Llef, a voice, cry, shout; llefain, to cry, bawl out.

Llefair, he will speak, talkative; craig lefair, a rock that echoes;
llefaru, to speak.

Llefais, llefesyff, he dare.

Llefais, I cried out.

Lleferthin, lazy, sluggish.

Lleferydd, a voice, a talk.

Llefenau, llefnau, the loins.

Llefrith, sweet milk, new milk.

Llefrithen, llyfrithen, a stye.

Lleffethair, a pair of fetters.

Llegach, lleges, weak, feeble.

Llegest, lobster.

Llehau, to place.

Lleian, a vestal virgin, a nun, a virgin for religion’s sake; lleianaeth,
the single life of virgins.

Lleibio, llyfu, to lick, to lap.

Lleidr, a thief.

Lleiddiad, a murderer, a man-slayer.

Lleigiaw, to fly, escape; lleigiad, he that looks for refuge.

Lleigys, yn lleigys, towards the evening.

Lleihau, to lessen, diminish.

Lleipro = llipryn.

Lleisio, to make a noise, note, or tone.

Lleisw, dye to wash with.

Lleithiar, lleithiawg, waterish, moist.

Lleithig, couch, throne.

Llemain, to leap.

Llên, learning, literature, discipline; gwyr llên, learned men, scholars.

Llenn, a veil, also curtains.

Lleng, a legion.

Llenlliain, a table-cloth, fine sheet.

Llenwi, to fill.

Llepian, to lap, lick.

Llerr, a kind of weed in corn.

Llerw, slender, weak, puny.

Lles, good, profit; llesu, lleshau, to benefit, profit, do good; lleshad,
goodness.

Llesg, desperately sick; llesgedd, llesgni, desperate sickness; llesgau,
llesghau, to languish, grow sicker and sicker; llesgethan, weak.

Llesmair, a trance, swooning; llesmeirio, to fall into a trance, swoon.

Llestair, to hinder.

Llestr, a vessel.

Lletgynt, anger, wrath.

Lletpai, oblique, crooked, askew, awry, warped.

Lletring, lled-drlng, a stair, step, step of a ladder.

Llety, a lodging, an inn; lletyu, lleteua, to lodge, to inn; lletywr,
lleteuwr, a guest, a lodger; lletywraig, a woman lodger.

Llethr, llechwedd, the side of a hill.

Llethrid, a flash of lightning.

Llethu, to overlay, press.

Lleu, to read.

Lleu, to place.

Lleuad, the moon; lleuer, lleufer, llefer, a light, candle; lleueru, to
shine, give light; lleurwydd, light, enlightening.

Lleuen, a louse; lleuog, lousy.

Llew, a lion; llewes, a lioness; llewpart, the female leopard.

Llewa, to eat or drink greedily.

Llewych, llewyrch, light, brightness, a shining; llewychu, to shine;
llewychedig, shining, bright, splendid.

Llewyg, llesmair, a trance, swoon; llewygu, llesmeirio, to swoon, fall in
a trance.

Llewyn, llawen, merry.

Llewyr, llefyr, a light, or shining; llewyrn, will-with-the-wisp, a night
walking fire.

Lleyg, a layman.

Lliain, linen cloth; lliain amdo, a shroud, or winding sheet; lliainrhŵd,
lint.

Lliant, a flood.

Llidiart, a gate.

Llieingig, llengig, the midriff.

Lliasu, to kill.

Lliaws, llios, a multitude; lliosddyblygu, lluosi, to multiply; lliosawg,
lliosog, manifold, numerous; lliosowgrwydd, multitude; lliosi, lliosogi,
lluosogi, to multiply.

Llibyn, llipa, limber, soft, drooping.

Llid, envy, malice, fury; llidio, to envy, bear malice, smart, ache;
llidiog, malicious, spiteful, very sore; llidiowgrwydd, envy, malice, the
torment in a sore.

Llif, a flood, a deluge; llifo, to flow; llifeirio, to over-flow, or
cover with water; llifddwr, llifeiriant, a flood, an inundation.

Llifo, lliwo, to dye, or colour.

Llif, a saw; llif ddûr, a file, a rasp; llifanu, to file, to rasp;
llifaid, llifed, ground, or sharpened in the edge; llifio, to saw.

Llifiant, consumption.

Llillen, a she-goat.

Llimp, smooth, polished.

Llin, llinyn, a line, or cord; llinell, a little line; llinellu, to
delineate, to draw a line.

Llîn, flax; llînhad, had-llîn, flax-seed; gardd lîn, flax-plot.

Llinagr, lukewarm.

Llindag, llindagu, choking, hanging; llindagu, to choke.

Lliniaru, to wax mild, or gentle.

Llinor, llinoryn, a weal, pus, or pimple.

Llinos, llinosen, a goldfinch.

Llipa, soft, limber, flagging, hanging down; llipau, to flag, to grow
limber; llipryn, a snivel, or flagging shrimp.

Llith, a lesson to be read.

Llith, a bait, an allurement, wet victuals; llithio, to allure, to
entice; llithiog, enticing, alluring.

Llithrig, slippery; llithro, to slide, or slip.

Lliw, a colour; lliwus, lliwiog, of a deep colour; lliwydd, a dyer;
lliwyddiaeth, the art of dyeing; lliwio, to colour; lliwdy, a dye-house.

Lliwed, a nation, people, army, troop, generation.

Lliwied, lliwio, to grudge, to upbraid.

Llo, a calf.

Lloc, a sheep-cote, fold; llocio, to drive into a corner or fold.

Lloches, a hole to hide in, a lurking-place.

Llochi, to stroke gently with the hand, to entreat kindly.

Llodig, hwch lodig, a sow seeking a boar.

Llodr, llawdr, clôs, breeches.

Llodwedd, mite, farthing.

Lloddi, comfort, solace.

Lloegr, England.

Lloer, lleuad, the moon; lloergan, goleu-leuad, moon-light; lloeren,
small moon; lloerig, gorffwyllog ar ryw amser o’r lleuad, lunatic.

Llofi, dylofi, to let or draw through the hand; lloflen, llaw fechan, a
little hand.

Llofres, a bosom.

Llofrudd, a murderer.

Llofyn, wisp, lock of hair.

Lloffa, to glean.

Llofft, a loft, or upper room.

Llog, usury.

Llogail, eaves beam; pen.

Llogawd, a parlour, chancel.

Llogell, a chest.

Llogwrn, a dwarf.

Llong, a ship; llongwr, a seaman, a mariner; llongwriaeth, navigation;
llongborth, a sea-port.

Llonaid, full, fulness.

Llonn, merry, cheerful; llonder, mirth, cheerfulness; llonni, to grow
merry, or cheerful.

Llonydd, quiet; llonyddwch, quietness; llonyddu, to make quiet; grow
quiet.

Llopan, a shoe.

Llorf, llyrf, a pipe, pipes, a flute, a musical instrument; llorfdant, a
string of a musical instrument.

Llorp, shin, shank, or leg.

Llosg, llosgiad, a burning; llosgi, to burn.

Llosgach, incest.

Llosgrâdd, seraphim.

Llosgwrn, a tail; llosgyrnog, tailed, or having a tail.

Llost, a spear, or lance, a javelin.

Llostlydan = addangc, beaver.

Llowaeth, lloweth, brought up by hand, tame; a handful.

Llowgist, a little hand chest.

Llowion, llofion, llywionllîn neu gywarch, the refuse of hemp, or flax.

Llowrydden, llawrwydden, llawrwydd, laurel.

Llu, an army; lluarth, a camp.

Lluch, a prayer.

Lluched, lightning.

Lluchio, to fall, throw; lluchwaew, javelin; lluchfa, lluwch, a drift of
snow.

Lluchynt, a most sudden violence, an assault.

Lludw, ashes; lludlyd, full of ashes.

Lludwawg = lledw, profuse.

Lludded, weariness, heaviness; lluddedig, weary, heavy.

LIuddias, lluddio, to hinder, frustrate.

Llueddwr, lluyddwr, a soldier.

Lluest, a shepherd’s cottage, a tent; lluestu, to pitch a tent.

Llug, light; llugas, that which gives light; llugorn, a lanthorn;
lluglawn, shining, splendid.

Llug, pestilence.

Lluganu, to dress, amend, or repair armour; llugenydd, a maker of armour.

Lluman, a standard, banner, ensign, or flag; llumanog, decked with flags
or banners; llumbren, llymwydden, the staff of a flag.

Llumon, mŵg, smoke.

Llun, an effigy, figure, or shape; llunio, to form, figure, or cut out;
lluniedydd, he that fashioneth, or cutteth out; lluniawd, lluniodr, a
form, or rule; lluniaidd, well-shaped.

Lluniaeth, necessary food; rhagluniaeth, providence; lluniaethu, to
ordain, provide.

Lluosog, numerous.

Llurig, a coat of fence, a shirt of mail; llurigawg, armed with a
brigandine, or coat of mail.

Llus, bilberries, whortleberries.

Llusg, a drawing after; llusgo, to draw after.

Llutrod, clay, ashes; llutrodi, to soil, to wax dirty.

Lluydd, llu, an army, camp, tent, an exercise; lluydda, to levy war;
lluyddwr, a soldier.

Lluyg, worms that breed in cheese.

Llw, an oath.

Llwch, dust; llychlyd, dusty.

Llwch, a lake, or standing water.

Llwdn, llwdwn, the young of any thing, a foal; llwdn hŵch, a hog; llydnu,
to foal.

Llwfr, llwrf, timid, cowardly; llyfrder, cowardice; llyfrhâu, to become
timid.

Llwgr, corrupt; llygredigaeth, corruption; llygru, to corrupt; llygrawr,
llygrwr, a corrupter; llygredig, llygrawg, corrupt.

Llwnglwm, a hard knot.

Llwm, bare, naked.

Llwnc, a swallowing down; llyncu, to swallow down.

Llwrw, a tax, forward.

Llwy, a spoon.

Llwybr, a path; llwybraidd, dexterous; llwybreiddio, to direct in the
way; llwybro, to walk, to make paths.

Llwyd, gray; llwydo, to wax gray, make gray, grow mouldy; llwydedd,
llwydni, mouldiness; pry llwyd, badger; brawd llwyd, grey friar.

Llwydd, llwyddiant, prosperity, happiness, good luck; llwyddiannu,
llwyddo, to prosper; llwyddiannus, prosperous, happy, lucky.

Llwyf, llwyfen, llwyfanen, llwyfwydden, elm.

Llwyfan menn, llwyfan certwyn, the body of a wain, or cart.

Llwyfennau, llefanau, llyfenau, lwynau, the loins.

Llwygaw, to fail, or be weary.

Llwyn, a wood, or grove.

Llwyn, lwyn, aelod, a loin.

Llwynog, a fox; _f._ llwynoges.

Llwyr, quite, utter, complete.

Llwyrwys, a common assembly.

Llwyth, a tribe.

Llwyth, a load; llwythog, loaded, burdened; llwytho, to load, to burden.

Llycheden, a fit of sickness.

Llychlyn, the Baltic.

Llychwin, soiled, dustied; lliw llychwin, a dusty colour; llychwino, to
dust, to soil.

Llydan, broad, wide.

Llydaw, Brittany.

Llydw, lledw, rich.

Llyfasu, to dare.

Llyfenau, llwyfenau, lwynau, the loins.

Llyfi, dyn swga, a sloven.

Llyfn, smooth, plain; llyfnhau, to make smooth; llyfnu, to harrow.

Llyfr, a book; llyfrwr, a scrivener, book-writer, registrar.

Llyfu, to lick.

Llyffant, llyffan, a frog; llyffant melyn, a yellow frog; llyffant du
dafadenog, a toad.

Llyfferthin, llefferthin, slothful.

Llyffethair, a pair of fetters.

Llyg, llygoden, mouse; _pl._ llygod; llygoden ffreinig, a rat.

Llygad, an eye; llygadog, llygeidiog, full of eyes, or holes.

Llygliw, a dusky colour.

Llygru, to corrupt.

Llyngyr, llynger, maw-worms.

Llym, sharp; llymhau, to sharpen.

Llyma, lo, behold.

Llymaid, a drink; llymeitian, to tipple.

Llymeirch, oysters.

Llyminog, eager, intense.

Llymrig, slippery like a fish.

Llymru, llymruwd, flummery.

Llymsi, naked, bare.

Llymysten, a sparrow-hawk.

Llŷn, haint llun, a contagious disease, a pestilence, a plague.

Llyncoes, the spavin.

Llyncu, to swallow; llynclyn, vortex.

Llynn, any sort of drink, or liquor; llynna, to drink often.

Llynn, a pool; llynwyn, a standing-pool.

Llynn-granc, chwarren, dyfaden wyllt, a wen or the like swelling.

Llŷr, the sea, stream, shore.

Llyry, llwrw, to tax.

Llys, a court, a palace; llysdyn, llysdin, llystyn, a city where a king’s
court is kept.

Llys, llysieuyn, a plant, herb.

Llys, llysiant, a rejecting, refusing, or forsaking; llysu, to reject, to
refuse.

Llysdad, tad ynghyfraith, a stepfather, a father-in-law; llysfab, a
step-son, or son-in-law; llysfam, mam ynghyfraith, a step-mother or
mother-in-law.

Llysenw, llasenw, a nick-name; llysenwi, to nick-name, to miscall.

Llysg, a little rod; llysgbren, llysbren, a rod, or little staff.

Llysieuyn, a plant, herb; llysieua, to gather herbs.

Llysnafedd, filthiness; llysnafeddog, filthy.

Llysywen, an eel.

Llyth, soft, tender, feeble.

Llythi, flounders.

Llythr, llythyr, a letter, an epistle; llythyr cymyn, the last will and
testament; llythyren, a letter, a character.

Llyu, llyfu, to lick, or lap.

Llyw, llywydd, a ruler, a governor; llyw llong, the rudder of a ship;
llywedyddiaeth, rheolaeth, rule, government; llywiawdr, rheolwr, a ruler,
a governor; llywio, llywodraethu, to rule, to govern; llywodraeth, rule,
governing, also good ordering of matters.

Llyw, lluniaeth, food, substance, necessaries.

Llywio, prysuro, to hurry, or ride away.

Llywio, curo, to beat hastily.

Llyweth = llowaeth.

Llywethan, llysywen, an eel.

Llywionen, a sheet.

Llywy, fair, white, splendid.



M.


Mab, a son; maban, baban, a little child, infant; mab-maeth, a foster
son; mabawl, filial, boyish; mabanaidd, mabinaidd, boyish, childish;
mabolaeth, mebyd, maboed, infancy, childishness, youth; mab aillt, a
captive, a bondman; mabwys, mabwysiad, mabgynwys, adoption; mabiaith,
gweniaith, fair, flattering words; mabddysg, that which one learns from
his cradle; mabddall, one that is born blind; mabcath, a catling, young
cat; mabinogi, juvenile instruction, a tale.

Mabcorn, mepcyrn, the inward part of a horn.

Mablygad, canwyll y llygad, the pupil, or apple of the eye.

Mabsant, patron saint.

Mabys, courtesy, good manners.

Macaid, a palmer-worm.

Macl, magl, a snare.

Macrell, _pl._ mecryll, a mackerel.

Macwy, a boy.

Machdeyrn, a monarch.

Machlud, to set; machlud haul, sun-set.

Mad, good.

Madarch, madarchen, y llyllon, a mushroom, a toad-stool.

Madien, madiain, honour, honoured, good, bountiful.

Madredd, putrefaction, corruption; madru, pydru, to putrify.

Madron, giddy-brained; madrondod, medrondod, mydrondod, madryndod,
giddiness, astonishment.

Madruddyn, modruddyn, a cartilage; madruddyn y cefn, the marrow of the
back.

Madws, high time, fulness of time.

Maddeu, to leave, forsake, spare, forgive, pardon; maddeuant, remission,
forgiveness.

Mae, is, are; there is; where is?

Maeddu, to smite.

Mael, malen, steel, iron.

Maelio, to gain, to make profit; maelier, _f._ mailieres, a merchant, a
gainer; maeleriaeth, merchandise.

Maen, a stone; maen blîf, a bullet, ball; maen clais, a marble-stone;
maen ehed, a load-stone; maen melin, a mill-stone; maen gwnn, a leaden
plummet with iron pikes; maen cawod, a thunderbolt; meinin, meinyn,
stony; maenglawdd, a quarry of stones, a stonewall; maen breuan, a
quern-stone.

Maenol, maenor, a possession or inheritance, a manor, farm.

Maer, a mayor; maer y biswail, a dairy-man; maeres, maerones, a
dairy-woman; maerdy, a summer habitation to make cheese and butter;
maeronaeth, maeroni, mayoralty; maer-dref, a mayor-town.

Maes, a field, afield, outside; maesa, to fight, make war.

Maesing, mysaing, to tread.

Maeth, nourishment; maethu, to nourish, nurse.

Maethgen, maeddu, a beating.

Mafon, berries, raspberries.

Magad, bagad, some.

Magai, a nurse.

Magiaid, macaid, palmer-worms.

Magi, a snare; maglu, to ensnare.

Magl, a blot, or blur.

Magnel, mangnel, an engine to batter down walls; a mangonel.

Magod, fattened, crammed.

Magu, to bring up, nurse up, breed; magwy, that which is nourished;
magwraeth, magiad, nourishment.

Magwyr, a row, the cuts of hay in ricks or stacks.

Maharen, a ram.

Mai, May.

Maidd, curds and whey; meidda, to beg for whey.

Main, thin, slender.

Mainc, a bench.

Maint, quantity, size.

Maith, long, tedious.

Mal, as, even as.

Mâl, a piece of money.

Mâl, a grinding mill; malu, to grind in a mill.

Malais, malice, envy; maleisus, malicious, envious.

Malc, a ridge of ground, two furrows, a sow.

Malen, dûr, haiarn, steel, iron.

Malur, maluria, mole-hill.

Malurio, to wear, waste, consume.

Malwen, malwoden, a snail.

Mall, corrupt, blasted; mallder, malldod, imperfection, impurity; mallu,
to corrupt, blast; mall haint, sorrow, heaviness, vexation.

Mam, mother, matrix; mamaeth, a nurse; mamog, an ewe with young; mamwydd,
an old goose; mamwys, matrix, motherhood.

Mân, small, little; mân-blu, down; mân-goed, shrubs; manyd, grains of
corn; manus, chaff; manod, driven snow.

Maneg, a glove.

Mangant, mân-gann, white, or fine flour.

Mangre, a place, village.

Manllwdu, a sheep.

Mann, a place, a note, or mark; mannu, to make an impression; mann geni,
a mole on the body.

Mannad, a print of butter.

Manon, banon, a queen.

Manrhed, rhiain, a maid, virgin.

Manson, a murmuring, to murmur.

Mant, a lip.

Mantach, toothless.

Mantais, an advantage; manteisio, to make advantage.

Mantawl, mantol, scales, or balance.

Mantell, a mantle.

Manu, to prosper.

Manwl, manol, diligent, careful; manylwaith, a curious work.

Manwyaidd, manweaidd, manweidd, subtle, fine, small, soft.

Maon, people, subjects.

Maran, a salmon, a mackerel.

Marannedd, subjects.

Marc, a mark, or note.

March, a horse; marchŵr, a horse-man; marchwriaeth, horsemanship;
marchog, a knight; marchogres, a woman riding on horse-back; marchogaeth,
to ride; marchawglu, a troop of horses; marchgen, a horse’s skin, or
hide.

Marchnad, a market; marchnata, to barter.

Marchwreinyn, a ringworm.

Marian, gravel.

Marl, marlbridd, marl.

Marron, a lord.

Mars, marsdîr, marches, or borders of a country.

Marsiandwriaeth, merchandise.

Marw, to die; marwaidd, deadly; marweiddio, to mortify; marwddydd, a
critical day; marwfis, a dead month; marwnad, an epitaph, an elegy;
marwol, mortal, deadly; marwolaeth, death; marwoldeb, mortality;
marwolaethu, marwnan, to kill, to die; marwysgafn, a death-bed, death-bed
song.

Marwar, marwor, coals afire; marwydos, marwor, burning coals.

Marwdonn, mardwn, the scurf of the head, dandriff.

Masarn, maple-trees.

Masglu, to reticulate; masgau, meshes; masgawl, interwoven.

Masnach, trade, commerce.

Mastig, mestig, a feast.

Masw, soft in handling; maswedd, softness, smoothness; wantonness,
vanity.

Matras, mattress.

Mathr, a trampling, or treading; mathru, to trample, tread.

Mau, mine, my.

Mawaid, the two hands full.

Mawl, moliant, praise; moli, to praise.

Mawn, turf, peat.

Mawr, great, big; mawredd, greatness; mawrhydi, majesty; mawredigrwydd,
magnanimity; mawreddog, great, noble, honourable; mawryddig, noble,
honourable; mawrfrydig, mawrfrydus, stout-hearted, magnanimous, mawrhau,
mawrhygu, magnify; mawrwriaeth, greatness of mind, magnanimity.

Mawrth, Mars; mis Mawrth, March; dydd Mawrth, Tuesday.

Maws, moesawl, courteous, mannerly, pleasant, delightful.

Mebyn, a youth; mebyd, youth.

Mechdeyrn, monarch.

Mechni, mechniaeth, suretyship; mechnio, to be surety.

Med, as far as, up to.

Medel, a company of reapers; medelwr, a reaper; mediad, a reaping; Medi,
to reap; September.

Medr, meidr, measure.

Medr, purpose, intent; ar fedr, designing, or intending; medru, medryd,
to understand how to do a thing; medrus, mannerly, well accomplished;
medrusrwydd, good manners.

Medwaledd, modwaledd, mydwaledd, eloquence, language.

Medd, mead, or drink made of honey; meddgell, a mead cellar.

Medd ef, he saith.

Meddal, soft; meddalu, meddalhau, to soften; meddalwch, softness.

Meddf, soft, delicate, effeminate; meddfaeth, dainty.

Meddu, to possess, enjoy, to own; meddiant, possession; meddiannol,
enjoying, possessing; meddiannu, to possess, to enjoy; meddwr, meddianwr,
a possessor, or owner.

Meddw, drunk, drunken; meddwi, to make drunk, to be drunk; meddwdod,
meddwaint, drunkenness.

Meddwl, a mind, thought, intention; meddylgar, mindful, thoughtful.

Meddyg, a surgeon; meddyginiaeth, remedy by surgery; meddyginiaethu, to
heal by surgery, to play the surgeon.

Meddygfys, the ring-finger.

Meddyglyn, meddeglyn, a kind of drink made of wort, spices, and honey.

Mefl, shame, disgrace, dishonesty.

Mefus, straw-berries.

Megidydd, a nourisher, a feeder, a nurser.

Megin, a bellows.

Megis, megys, meis, as, even as, as it were.

Mehefin, June.

Mehin, the fat, properly of bacon or pork; mehinawr, fat, full of
fatness.

Mehyn, a cart.

Meichiad, a swineherd.

Meidr, medr, a measure; meidradur, a measurer; meidraeth, measure.

Meidrol, finite, limited, determined, finished, ended; anfeidrol,
infinite.

Meigen, a war.

Meigryn, the megrim, vertigo.

Meilierydd, melierydd, a lark.

Meilwn, the small of the leg.

Meillion, flowers, clover.

Meipen, _pl._ maip, a turnip.

Meiriol, a thaw; meirioli, to thaw.

Meiriones, a dairy-woman.

Meisgyn, a moth.

Meistr, a master, a teacher; meistrolaeth, mastership, rule, authority;
meistroli, to master, to rule; meistres, a mistress.

Meityn, a minute of time.

Meithrin, to nourish, bring up, nurse.

Meiwyr, armed men.

Mêl, honey; melfoch, bears.

Melan, malen, steel.

Melerth, chilblain.

Melfed, velvet.

Melgawod, honey dew, mildew.

Melgorn, melgranc, a scald in the head.

Melierydd, a lark.

Melin, a mill; melinydd, a miller; meilina, to beg from mill to mill.

Meltyrch, chilblain.

Melus, sweet; melusder, sweetness.

Melyn, yellow; melynog, llinosen, a goldfinch; melynwy, the yolk of an
egg.

Melldigo, to curse.

Mellt, lightnings; melltennu, to lighten.

Melltith, a curse; melltithio, to curse; melltigedig, cursed, accurst.

Memrwn, parchment.

Men, myn, man, where.

Menestr, a wine-taster, a wine-bibber; a cup-bearer.

Menn, a cart; mennaid, a cartload; mennwr, a carter.

Menwyd, joy, gladness, mirth.

Menybr, hilt, haft, handle.

Meon, sea.

Mêr, marrow; merion, the best, or innermost marrow.

Merch, a daughter, woman.

Mercher, Merchyr, Mercury; dydd Marcher, Wednesday.

Mêrddrain, thorns growing by the water side.

Merddwr, standing water; merllynn, a standing lake, or pool.

Mererid, a pearl.

Merf, tasteless, insipid, unsavoury; blâs merf, an unsavoury taste.

Mêrhelig, willow twigs.

Merinwr, a mariner, seaman.

Merlyn, a pony.

Merlys, a plant or herb growing in the water.

Merolaeth, moisture, sap.

Merthyr, a martyr; merthyru, to martyr; merthyrdod, merthyrolaeth,
martyrdom.

Merwerydd, the Irish Sea; the sea.

Merwin, merwindod, a smart or numbness occasioned by a violent cold;
merwino, to ache, or smart violently, to tingle.

Merwys, ousel, blackbird.

Merydd, moist, slothful, stagnant.

Meryw, juniper.

Mês, acorns; mesbren, an oak-tree; mesyryd, plenty of acorns.

Mestig, mastig, a feast.

Mesur, measure, or proportion; mesuro, to mete, measure.

Metelus, of good metal.

Methl, an ensnaring, deceiving; methlu, to entangle, to deceive.

Methu, to decay, fail, perish; methedig, methiant, weak, feeble;
methineb, methiant, decay.

Meu, mau, my, mine.

Meudwy, a hermit.

Meuedd, meufedd, riches.

Mewian, to cry like a cat.

Mewn, in.

Mewyd, laziness.

Mi, myfi, I, me.

Mic, a moment of time.

Micas, brewis.

Micws, the cock of a spout, or water-pipe.

Midlan, list.

Mieri, briars, brambles; mierinllwyn, a bramble bush.

Mig ymguddio, to play hide and seek.

Mign, bog, dirt, mire.

Migwrn, a knuckle, or joint.

Mil, a thousand; milwaith, a thousand times.

Mil, a beast; milyn, a little beast.

Milain, forward, stubborn, sullen; mileinio, to wax stubborn, or
obstinate; mileindra, stubbornness, sullenness, obstinacy.

Milgi, a grey-hound; miliast, a grey-hound bitch.

Milrith, fœtus, embryo.

Milwr, a soldier; milwriaeth, warfare, war-like affairs.

Mill, violet.

Milldir, a mile; milldir ffreinig, a league.

Mîn, an edge, sharpness; miniog, edged, sharp.

Minnau, I also.

Minws, mîndene, a little lip, or thin lip; minial, to move one’s lip;
mingam, a wry mouth; mingamu, to make a wry mouth.

Miod, bara miod, thin cakes of bread made formerly for offerings.

Mirain, fair, beautiful; mireinwch, beauty, fairness.

Mîs, month; misglwyf, menses.

Miswrn, a veil.

Mit, mydd, a tub.

Miw, biw, buwch, a cow.

Miwail, light, soft, glossy.

Mo, an intensifying negative.

Môch, swine; mochyn, a hog; mochyrio, to grunt as a sow.

Moch, quick, nimble.

Mochdyn, a moth.

Modfedd, an inch.

Modruddyn, madruddyn, a gristle.

Modrwy, a ring; modrwyog, ringed, or decked with rings.

Modryb, an aunt.

Modrydaf, a bee-hive.

Modur, a king, a ruler.

Modwaeledd, eloquence.

Modd, a manner, form, fashion; moddus, moddgar, courteous, mannerly.

Moel, bald; a hill; moeli, to wax bald; moelyn, that is bald; moelcen,
moeledd, moelni, baldness; moeli clustiau, to prick up the ears.

Moeldês, the heat of the sun; moelystod, gadding; moelystota, to gad as
cattle do in hot weather.

Moelrhon, a porpoise.

Moes, do thou give me.

Moes, courtesy, manners; moesawg, moesawl, courteous, mannerly.

Moethus, mwythus, dainty, delicate, luscious.

Moi, to cast, to foal.

Môl llygaid, the white scurf of the eyes; moli llyged, to gather scurf in
the eyes; molog, scurfy.

Mold, molt, a mould.

Moli, moliannu, to praise; molach, praise, commendation; molawd, moliant,
praise; moelediw, praiseworthy; moliannus, praised, to be praised;
moliant, praise.

Moled, a linen hood, veil.

Moloch, restless, troublesome.

Molwynog, full, large, complete.

Môllt, _pl._ myllt, a wether.

Monachdy, monachlog, mynachlog, a monastery.

Monochen, the small gut, or chitterling salted, a sausage.

Monni, to be angry, displeased; monnyn, morose, froward.

Mor, how, so, as.

Môr, the sea; môr tawch, the hazy sea; y cefnfor, the ocean; Morrudd, y
Môr Côch, the Red Sea; morad, customs, or yearly revenues by sea; morben,
a hill lying out in the sea, a promontory; mor câth, a ray, skate;
mordeiff, mordeat, moriwr, a seaman, a mariner; môrdrai, the ebbing of
the sea; mordwy, the noise or raging of the sea; mordwyo, morio, to sail
a ship; moreb, port, or haven; môr-ryd, an arm of the sea, a channel, or
ditch; morfa, a moor, or fennish place which the sea overflows; môrfarch,
a whale; morfil, a sea-monster, a whale; môr-forwyn, a mermaid; môrfran,
a cormorant; morgerwyn, a gulf in the sea, môrgranc, a sea-crab;
morymlawdd, llanw’r môr, a sea-flood, or tide; mor-lô, glo’r mor,
sea-coals; morgyllell, a cuttle-fish; môrwennol, a martinet; Morwerydd,
Merwerydd, Môr Iwerddon, the Irish Sea, the Atlantic.

Morach, merry, pleasant.

Morddwyd, a thigh.

Morgrug, mowion, ants, pismires.

Morhwch, a dolphin.

Moron, carrots, parsnips; moron gwynion, parsnips; moron cochion,
carrots; _sing._ moronen.

Morthwyl, mwrthwl, a hammer; morthwylio, to hammer.

Morwydd, mulberry-trees.

Morwyn, a virgin, a maid; morwyndod, virginity; morwynaidd, maidenly,
virgin-like.

Morwysiaid, clych y dwfr, bubbles of water.

Motlai, of divers colours.

Mu, ox; the price of an ox; the fourth part of a ton.

Muchudd, jet.

Mud, dumb; mudan, a dumb man; mudaniaeth, dumbness.

Mud, the carriage of household goods, upon removing from one house or
place to another; mudo, to remove, to carry household goods.

Mud, mew, moult.

Mul, bashful, modest, simple.

Mul, a mule.

Mulfran, a cormorant.

Mun, munaid, a handful.

Muner, a prince, a lord.

Munud, munudyn, a nod, or beck, a minute.

Munudrwydd, manners.

Mur, a stone wall; murio, to build; muriwr, a wall-builder; murddyn, the
ruins of any old building.

Murn, harm, murder; murnio, to harm, murder.

Mursen, a coy dame; mursendod, coyness, affectation; mursenaidd,
effeminate, nice, affected.

Musgrell, slothful, sluggish; musgrellni, slothfulness, sluggishness.

Mŵd, a vault; the roof of a house.

Mwdran, gruel.

Mwdwl, a cock or stack of hay; mydylu, to make a cock or stack.

Mwg, smoke; mygu, to smoke; mwgdarth, mygdarth, angar, tarth, niwl, a
vapour, smoke, a fog.

Mwgwd, mask; mwgwd yr ieir, blind man’s buff.

Mwng, the mane of a horse; myngog, having a great mane.

Mwngial, to mutter, to murmur, to speak though the teeth.

Mwlwg, sweepings.

Mwll, sultry.

Mŵn, a glove, the eye of a needle.

Mŵn, ore, mine.

Mwnai, money.

Mwnwgl, a neck, or throat; mwnwgl y troed, the instep.

Mwrthwl, myrthwl, morthwyl, a hammer.

Mws, stinking, rank.

Mwsogl, moss; mwsogli, to grow mossy; mwsoglyd, mossy.

Mwtlai, of divers colours.

Mŵth, quick, swift, immediately.

Mwy, greater; mwyedig, increased, multiplied; mwyhau, to increase, to
make greater; mwyadau, augmentations.

Mwyalch, a black-bird.

Mwyar, berries.

Mwyd, moistening, or steeping in water; mwydo, to moisten; mwydion,
mwyddionyn, the pith or heart of herbs or shrubs; mwydion bara, crumbs of
bread.

Mwygl, warm, hot; mwyglo, to grow warm, or hot.

Mwyglen, a harlot.

Mwyn, meek, gentle, kind, loving; mwynen, a loving female; mwynder,
familarity, civility, gentleness.

Mwyn, fruition, enjoymennt, use; mwynhau, to enjoy; mwyniant, enjoyment.

Mwyn, mwn, ore, mine; mwyn coch, red ochre, mwynglawdd, a mine.

Mwys, amwys, doubtful; gair mwys, pun, ambiguity.

Mwys, a certain vessel, a kind of measure; mwys bara, a basket to keep or
carry bread in.

Mwyth, soft, delicate; mwythau, dainties, delicacies; mwythus, moethus,
dainty, delicate.

Mychdeyrn, a monarch, emperor.

Mydr, a metre; mydrwr, poet.

Mydwaledd, eloquence, speech.

Mydwraig, bydwraig, a midwife.

Mydd, mit, a tub.

Myfyr, pensive; myfyrdod, meditation; myfyrio, to meditate.

Myg, honoured, glorious; myged, honour; mygedawg, honoured.

Mygr, fair, splendid, beautiful.

Mygu, to stifle, or smother.

Mygu, to smoke, to stifle.

Myngial, to speak through the teeth or nose, to mutter.

Myngog, having a mane.

Myngus, guttural, speaking through the nose.

Myharan, ram; llygaid myheryn, limpets.

Mympwy, arbitration, judgment.

Mymryn, the least that may be.

Myn, an adverb of swearing, by.

Mynach, a monk.

Mynafu, to threaten, hurt.

Mynag, a narration, a report of a thing; mynegi, to declare, or inform;
mynegai, he that declareth, or reporteth, an index; mynagfys, bys ye uwd,
the fore-finger.

Mynawg, courteous, generous, mild; mynawgrwydd, mynogi, courtesy,
generosity, mildness.

Mynawyd, an awl.

Mynci, a horse-collar.

Myncog, heath, or ling.

Myned, to go.

Mynestr, menestr, a cup-bearer.

Mynn, a kid; mynnyn, a little he-kid; mynnen, a little she-kid.

Mynnu, to be willing, seek, have, get a thing.

Mynor, marble.

Mynwair, myngwair, a horse-collar made of hay, straw, leather, or linen.

Mynwent, grave-yard.

Mynych, often, frequently; mynychu, to frequent.

Mynydd, a mountain.

Mynyglog, quinsy.

Myr, ants, pismires.

Mŷr, _pl. of_ môr, sea.

Myrdd, ten thousand.

Myrierid, pearls.

Myrydd, a fast beast.

Mysaing, to tread, trample.

Mysg, a mixture, mixed; ymysg, among, amongst; mysgu, cymysgu, to mix.

Mysgfu, to unbind, to loose.

Mysp, a sea.

Mystrych, mis-ddrych, menses.

Myswynog, a farrow cow.

Mywion, ants, pismires.



N.


Na, nac, not, neither, no, than; nacau, to deny, to refuse; nad, not.

Nabod = adnabod, to know, recognise.

Nachaf, behold!

Nâd, a noise, sound, cry; nadu, to make a noise, to cry.

Nadolig, Natalig, Christmas.

Naddu, naddial, to cut, hew.

Nâf, Lord.

Nag, than.

Nag ê, no, not, neither, in nowise; nag, naca, nacâd, a denial, a
refusal; negydd, negyf, a denier, a refuser; negyddiaeth, negyfaeth, a
denial, a refusal.

Nai, a nephew.

Naid, a leap, jump; neidio, to leap, jump.

Naid, refuge, protection.

Naill, either one or the other; nailldu, one of two sides; neillduo, to
separate; neillduol, separated.

Nain, a grand-mother.

Nam, a fault, sin, exception; dinam, faultless, certain.

Namyn, unless, except, but.

Nannaill, neither.

Nâr, a dwarf.

Natur, naturiaeth, nature, genius; naturiol, natural, ingenious,
good-humoured.

Naw, nine; nawais, nine male servants; nawed, nawfed, ninth.

Nawd, a cry, a noise.

Nawd, nature, trait.

Nawdd, nawd, protection, refuge.

Nawf, nofiad, a swimming.

Nawn, prydnawn, the afternoon.

Nawsaidd, naturiol, ingenious; naws, nature; nawsio, to soften.

Ne, _mut. of _gne, a colour.

Neb, nebawd, no body, any body; nepell, not far; neblech, no where;
nebun, a certain one.

Nêdd, nits.

Neddair, hands.

Neddau, neddyf, an adze.

Nef, heaven; nefol, heavenly; nefolder, heavenly thoughts.

Neges, a message, a business.

Neidio, to leap; jump.

Neidr, a snake, adder.

Neifion, Neptune, sea, water.

Neithior, a wedding.

Neithiwyr, neithiwr, last night, yesterday in the evening.

Nemawr, not much, not many.

Nenn, the roof of a house; nenbren, the uppermost beam in a roof.

Neodr, neither.

Nêr, the Lord.

Nerth, strength, force, fortitude; nerthog, nerthol, strong, mighty,
potent; nerthu, to strengthen.

Nês, nearer; nesu, nesau, to draw near, to approach.

Neu, or.

Neu, neud, near, neus, it is, truly.

Neuad, wealth, riches.

Neuadd, a hall.

Neued, neuedd, neufedd, a longing, or earnest desire; neuo, hiraethu, to
long, to covet, to desire.

Newid, a changing; newidio, to change; newid, cheapness, cheap;
newidwriaeth, commerce or exchange; newidiol, changeable, mutable.

Newydd, news; newydd, new, fresh; newydd tanlliw, brand new; newyddian, a
novice.

Newyn, hunger, scarcity, famine; newynllyd, hungry; newynu, to hunger.

Ni, ni’s, nid, not.

Ni, nyni, we, ourselves.

Nidr, nidri, entangling, hindering; nidro, to entangle, to encumber;
nidrwr, one that encumbreth.

Nifer, a number.

Nifwl, niwl, a fog, a mist; nifwlog, niwlog, foggy, misty.

Nigus, wrinkled, crumpled, rifled.

Nîth, a niece.

Nithio, to winnow; nithlen, a fan, or sheet to winnow corn with.

Niweid, harm, hurt, or damage; niweidio, to hurt, to damnify; niweidiol,
hurtful.

Niwlen, niwl, a mist, or fog; niwlog, misty, foggy.

Nôd, a mark; nodi, to mark; nodol, notable, marked.

Nodwydd, a needle.

Nodd, sap, juice.

Nodded, nawdd, refuge, protection, noddi, to protect, or defend; noddfa,
a refuge, a sanctuary.

Noe, dish, tray.

Noeth, bare, naked; noethi, to make bare, or naked.

Nofio, to swim.

Nôs, night; nosi, to grow night; nos-wyl, the eve of a feast; nos-wylio,
to leave work for that day.

Nwyf, vigour, lustiness, lust; nwyfus amorous, wanton.

Nych, nychdod, consumption, languishing, pining away; nychlyd, faint,
weak, feeble; nychu, to pine away, to languish.

Nycha = nachaf, lo! behold.

Nyddu, to spin.

Nyf, nef, heaven.

Nyth, a nest; nythu, to nest; nythlwyth, nythed, a nest full.



O.


O, of, from.

O, os, od, if.

O, him, it.

Obediw, funeral rites and ceremonies.

Obleid, oblegid, for, because of.

Obry, below, underneath, there.

Ocr, ocraeth, llôg, usury.

Och! alas! woe! a groan; ochain, ochi, to groan; ochenaid, uchenaid, a
sigh.

Ochr, edge, rim, side; ochri, to make a rim, or edge, to take sides;
ochrog, edged, sharpened, or rimmed.

Od, snow; odi, to snow.

Od, notable.

Od, os, if.

Od, odiaeth, odiaethol, excellent.

Odfa = oedfa, opportunity.

Odid, rare, scarce, not frequent.

Odl, rhyme; odli, to rhyme.

Odyn, a kiln, a melting-house; odyndy, a bake-house.

Oddf, oddfyn, pimple, knob, boss.

Oddi, out of, from.

Oddieithr, without, except, unless.

Oddifrif, in earnest.

Oddiwrth, from.

Oed, oedran, age, an age; oedi, to delay, or defer; oediog, oedrannus,
aged, ancient; oedfa, occasion.

Oedd, it was, was, were.

Oen, a lamb; ŵyn, lambs; oenyn, a little lamb; oenig, a little ewe-lamb.

Oer, oerfelog, cold; oerchwedl, an ill news; oerder, oerfa, oerni,
oerfel, coldness; oeri, to grow cold, to cool; oernad, lamentation, a
lamentable cry.

Oes, ydyw, there is, is there?

Oes, an age, or term of life; oesog, oedrannus, long-lived, ancient;
oesydd, oeswr, an ancient.

Ofer, vain, idle; ofera, to be idle, to follow vanity; oferddyn, oferwr,
an idle, drunken, sottish fellow; oferedd, vanity, idleness; ofer goel,
superstition; oferwaith, a vain work, labour in vain.

Ofn, fear; ofnog, ofnus, timid; ofnadwy, terrible, frightful; ofni,
ofnhau, to fear.

Ofregedd, playing the fool, acting as a child.

Offeiriad, a priest; offeiriadaeth, priesthood; offeren, mass.

Offer, instruments, or tools; offeru, to make instruments, to furnish
with instruments.

Offrwm, an oblation, or sacrifice, an offering; offrymu, to offer, or
sacrifice.

Og, a harrow.

Ogfaen, ogfaenen, grawn, the berries of white thorns.

Ogof, a cave.

Ongl, congl, an angle, or corner.

Ongyr, a spear.

Oi, oîan, ho! hail! well done.

Oio, ow, O! alas!

Ol, trace, mark, impression.

Olaf, hindermost, or last of all.

Olew, oil.

Olewydden, the olive tree.

Olo, golo, wealth, riches.

Olpai, eylet-holes.

Olrhain, to seek out as a hound doth, to follow or pursue the tracks;
olrhewr, olrheinydd, olreiniwr, a diligent searcher, or seeker out, one
that follows the track.

Olwch, prayer.

Olwyn, a wheel; olwynog, having wheels.

Olwynn, almost white, short of white.

Oll, all, the whole.

Onaddun, onaddynt, ohonynt, from them, of them, out of them.

Oni, os ni, unless.

Onid, ond, unless, but, if not.

Onnen, _pl._ onn, ynn, an ash-tree.

Or, a coast, border.

Or, os, if.

Orddew, thick.

Orgraff, orthography.

Orian, oriain, to cry often.

Oriau, hours; _pl. of_ awr; orig, a short hour; oriog, inconstant; orlais
(cloc), a clock.

Orlludd, the chick in the egg.

Orn, fear, terror.

Ornest, a duel, a fight between two; ornestwr, a champion.

Orohïan, a paean.

Orpai, olpai, eylet-holes.

Orwyrain, arwyrain, to ascend; a song of praise.

Osb, an host, a guest, or lodger; _pl._ osbion, ysb.

Oseb, a gift, donation.

Osgl, a bough, a leaf of a tree; osglog, canghenog, full of boughs.

Osgo, obliquity, crookedness; osgoi, to go aside, to withdraw.

Osgyd, osged, osgud, a basin.

Oslef, a voice.

Oswydd, enemies, adversaries.

Ow! alas! woe is me.

Owmal, enamelling.



P.


Pa, which, who; pa un, whether, who, which; pam, paham, why, wherefore.

Pab, a Pope; Pabaeth, the Papacy; Pabyddiaeth, Popery.

Pabell, a tent, see pebyll.

Pabl, judgment; pablu, to judge.

Pabwyr, rushes.

Padell, a pan.

Paeled, a plaster, cake, skull-cap.

Paentio, to paint.

Paeol, a tankard.

Paill, flour; peillio, to sift meal.

Pair, a cauldron.

Pais, a petticoat, a doublet.

Paith, peithiawg, deserted, spoiled, wasted, destroyed.

Pâl, a spade, a shovel; palu, to dig up earth with a spade.

Paladr, a spear, staff, the trunk of a tree, the stalk of a flower; the
sunbeam; paledrydd, a stretcher.

Palalwy, palawyf, linden.

Paled, a shaft; gware paled, to tilt, joust.

Palf, the palm of the hand; palfais, the shoulder-blade; palfod, a stroke
with an open hand; palfu, palfalu, to handle gently, to stroke, to feel
with the hand.

Palffrai, a palfrey.

Pali, satin, or very fine linen-cloth.

Palis, thin partition, wainscot.

Palmant, a pavement.

Palmidwydd, palmwydd, palms.

Pall, lack, failing, defect, an eclipse; pallu, to fail.

Pall, a throne.

Pân, fur, down.

Pan, when, what time.

Pan, a cup.

Pan brethyn, a fulling of cloth; pannu, to full cloth; pannwr, a fuller
of cloth; pandy, a fuller’s workhouse.

Pannu, panylu, to be made lower, to dent, to indent; pannwl, a lower
ground, or bottom.

Pannys, parsnips, carrots.

Pant, a valley, or bottom.

Papir, papur, paper.

Pâr, a spear, a lance.

Pâr, a pair, or couple.

Pâr, provided, effected.

Para, duration, perseverance; parhau, to persevere, to last and endure;
parhaus, during, lasting.

Parabl, a speech; parablus, eloquent.

Paradwys, a paradise; paradwysaidd, heavenly.

Parag, because of what.

Parch, reverence, respect.

Parddu, soot.

Pared, a wall of a house; parwydydd, walls of a house; parwyden, a wall,
thin flank.

Parlawr, parlour.

Parlys, palsy.

Pared, ready, quick, expedite; paratoi, to prepare, to make ready.

Parri, a flock, a herd.

Parsel, a mark to shoot arrows at.

Parth, parthed, parthred, perthryd, a part; parthu, to divide.

Pâs, peswch, a chin cough, a cough; pesychu, to cough.

Pasawl, how many.

Pasc, Easter.

Pasg, the food for fattening of cattle; pesgi, to fatten, to feed;
pasgwch, a fat hog, or swine; pasgedig, fatted, fattened, crammed;
pasgadur, pesgwr, a feeder.

Pastwn, a long club.

Pathawr, maugre, in spite of.

Pathew, a dormouse.

Paun, a peacock; peunes, a pea-hen.

Pawb, everybody.

Pawen, a paw.

Pawl, a stake, post, pile; polioni, to set stakes, or piles in the
ground.

Pawr, pori, the feeding of cattle.

Pe, if.

Pebyll, tent (later tents, with _sing._ pabell); pebylliaw, to encamp, to
pitch tents.

Pecaid, a peck.

Pechod, a sin, pity; pechu, to sin; pechadur, a sinner; pechadures, a
woman sinner.

Ped, if.

Pedestr, peddestr, a footman; pedestrig, peddestrig, belonging to a
footman, going or walking; pedol, a horse-shoe; pedoli, to shoe a horse;
pedolog, having iron shoes.

Pedrain, the buttocks, haunches.

Pedrogl pedrongl, having four angles, a quadrate; pedror, pedwaraidd,
pedwarochor, squared, four square; pedwar, four; pedwerydd, fourth;
pedwaredd, the fourth; pedryfal, a square valley, anything that is
four-square; pedryfan, pedwar rhan byd, the four parts of the world.

Pedryael, border, ridge, edge.

Pedryddog, a footman.

Pedryging, the palm of the hand.

Pedrylaw, handy, dexterous.

Pedrylef, a clear voice.

Pedryliw, a perfect colour.

Peddestr, a footman.

Peddyd, a footman.

Pefr, fine, fair, pure; pefredd, fairness, beauty, elegancy.

Pefren, somewhat fair.

Pefyr, to bark, yelp.

Pegor, corr, a dwarf.

Pegwn, an axle-tree, pivot.

Peidio, to cease, to leave off.

Peillio, to sift the flour out of meal; peilliaid, the flour of meal.

Peinioel, household bread made of wheat.

Peiriant, an instrument, organ.

Peiswyn, chaff.

Peithyn, peithynen, a comb, a ridge-tile, cogs of a wheel, grain of wood,
a weaver’s reed, a frame for writing; peithwydd, the reeds of a loom.

Pêl, a ball; pelen, a little ball; pelig, a battle dore; pellen, a bottom
of yarn, a ball.

Pelrhe, trouble, business.

Pelydr, beam, sunbeam.

Pell, far, remote; pellder, long distance, length of time; pellennig,
far, remote; pellenigrwydd, pellter, long distance of place; pellhau, to
remove far off, to prolong.

Pen, a head; penbleth, with plaited hair, perplexity.

Penadur, a prince, a primate; penaduriaeth, primacy, principality.

Penarth, penardd, a promontory.

Penbaladr, all, throughout.

Penbwl, tadpole.

Pencais, lord-treasurer.

Pencerdd, chief musician.

Penci, a dog-fish.

Penciwdod, a captain, leader.

Penclwm, a hilt, haft, handle.

Pencnaw, pencno, the joints of the bones, where they are joined together
with sinews.

Pencnud, the leader of wolves.

Pencyfeistedd, the chief seat.

Pencynydd, chief huntsman.

Penchwiban, light-headed, giddy.

Pendefig, a prince, primate, nobleman; pendefigaeth, peerage.

Pendodi, to add, or join to.

Pendoll, pendyllog, having a head full of holes.

Pendramwnwgl, headlong.

Pendro, giddiness, or dizziness in the heads of beasts, which cause them
to whirl, roll, and turn round; penddar, penddaredd, a disease, which
causes a swimming of the head, with a kind of mistiness, or sparkling of
the eyes.

Pendduyn, a boil, or botch.

Penel, a banner, a standard; a prince.

Penelin, an elbow.

Penfar, pennor, penwer, a little gate, a postern; a muzzle.

Penfeddw, giddy; penfeddwi, to grow giddy; penfeddwdod, a giddiness.

Penffestr, a head-stall, a collar.

Penffestin, a helmet, or head-piece; penffestiniawg, that weareth a
helmet.

Penffrwyn, an ornament for a horse’s head, a head-stall.

Penglog, a skull.

Pengrych, curly headed.

Penguwch, a topknot, periwig.

Penhwyad, a pike.

Penial, subtle, precious.

Penigamp, excellent, skilful.

Penioel, bara penioel, bara tylwyth, household bread.

Penloyn, a titmouse.

Penllad, the chiefest good.

Penlliain, headcloth, canopy.

Penllinin, a tail.

Penllwyd, grey headed; penllwydni, whiteness of hair.

Pennâig, chieftain.

Pennawr, pennor, helmet.

Pennill, a panel of glass, a stave of a song.

Pennod, a chapter, a certain mark made in the end of anything; penodi, to
appoint, to mark the end of anything.

Pennor, penfar, penwar, a headstall, a muzzle.

Pennyg, fat tripes, or chitterlings.

Penrhaith, supreme judge.

Penrhe, penrhwym, a fillet.

Penrhyn, a promontory.

Pentan, the chimney-corner, the back of the fire.

Penteulu, the chief, or head of a family, a steward.

Pentref, a village.

Pentwr, a heap; pentyrru, to heap.

Penty, a pent-house.

Penwag, a herring.

Penwisg, a head-dress.

Penwn, a banner, ensign, flag.

Penyd, penance, a punishment.

Pepreth, pepru, to babble or chat.

Pêr, peraidd, sweet or mellow; pereiddio, to sweeten.

Perced, a kind of net for fishing.

Perchen, perchennog, the possessor, owner; perchenogi, to possess, own;
perchenogaeth, possession.

Pererin, a pilgrim; pererinbren, pine-tree; pererindod, pilgrimage.

Perfedd, entrails; y berfeddwlad, the middle country.

Perffaith, perffeithio, to perfect.

Perging, defence, screen.

Peri, to make, bidding.

Periglor, a parish priest, curate.

Perigl, peril, danger; peryglu, to endanger; peryglus, dangerous.

Perlewig, a pleasant ecstasy.

Perllan, an orchard.

Person, a parson; persondod, personoliaeth, a rectory, benefice,
personality.

Pert, dapper, delicate, fine, brisk.

Perth, a bush.

Perthynu, to belong, or appertain to; perthynas, relations, appurtenance;
perthynol, pertaining.

Perwyl, a resolution, purpose.

Peryddon, the Dee.

Peryf, king, sovereign.

Pes, os, if.

Pesawl, how many.

Pesgi, to feed, to make fat.

Peswch, a cough; pesychu, to cough.

Pet, ped, if.

Petris, partridges.

Petrual, a square plot.

Petrus, doubtful; petruso, doubt.

Peth, a part, a thing; rhywbeth, something.

Peu, peus, a habitation, dwelling, cottage, country.

Peufyd, peufyth, dovetailing.

Peuo, to breathe out, to pant.

Pi, piogen, a magpie; piod, piogod, magpies.

Piau, mi biau, ’tis mine; ti biau, ’tis thine.

Pîb, pîbell, a pipe; pibydd, a piper; pibydd cod, a bag piper.

Pîb, looseness; pibo, to purge; piplyd, given to looseness, or purging;
pipre, pibiad, looseness.

Pibonwy, an icicle.

Pibori, buds, budding.

Picell, a dart, a pile.

Picio, to dart, fly.

Pig, the point, or nib of anything; pig aderyn, the bill of a bird; pigo,
to prick, to peck.

Pigyn, picyn, a noggin.

Pigfforch, a pitchfork.

Piglaw, a heavy rain, or shower.

Pîl, a rind, bark, shell, or pill; pilio, to pill; pîltonen, a thin rind.

Pildin, a galling by riding.

Pilen, pilionen, a rag, or clout.

Piler, a column, pillar.

Pilgi, a basin, a laver.

Pilwrn, a javelin.

Pilyn, a rag, clout.

Pill, a fortress, a place of defence.

Pill, a log, stem, stake.

Pinagl, a pinnacle.

Pinn, a pen, a pin.

Pisgen, pisgwydden, a linden.

Piso, to make water; pision, urine.

Pistyll, a water-spout; pistyllio, to spout.

Piw, a breast, teat, pap, or udder.

Pla, _pl._ plâu, plague.

Plâd, plate, armour.

Pladur, a scythe; pladurwr, a mower.

Plaid, a part, party; pleidio, to take part with one side or other.

Plann, a plantation; plannu, to plant; planhigyn, a plant.

Plant, children; planta, to get children; plantos, little children.

Plas, a mansion.

Plegyd, plaid, part, side, or party.

Pleth, a plaiting, or braiding; plethu, to plait, braid, to entangle.

Pliant, bliant, fine linen cloth.

Plisg, blisg, shells.

Plith, among, mixed.

Plu, feathers; pluyn, pluen, a feather; plucan, fine feathers, down;
pluo, to pluck off the feathers.

Pluor, dust, powder.

Plwca, dirt, clay.

Plwm, lead; plymen, a leaden vessel, a mass of lead, a cistern.

Plwyf, a parish, diocese.

Plyg, a wrinkle, or fold, a bending; plygu, to fold, to bend; plycroth,
part of the belly.

Plygain, the break of day.

Plymlwy, plymnwyd, a war, battle, conflict.

Po, by how much.

Pob, all, every.

Pobi, to bake; pobydd, a baker; pobyddiaeth, the art of baking; pobdy, an
oven, a bakehouse.

Pobl, people.

Pocyn, a kiss.

Poed, boed, let it be, so be it.

Poen, labour, torment; poeni, to labour; poenedigaeth, torment, labour;
poenus, laborious.

Poer, poeryn, a spittle; poeri, to spit.

Poeth, hot; poethi, to wax hot; poethni, poethineb, heat.

Pôl, _fem._ of pŵl, blunt.

Ponar, a bean.

Poni, ponid, why not?

Pont, bridge.

Por, a lord.

Porchell, a boar pig.

Porffor, purple.

Pori, to feed, to grraze; porfa, a pasture.

Portread, a pattern, portraiture, specimen, model.

Porth, assistance, succour; porthorddwy, surcour, supply.

Porth, a gate, a door; porthor, a door-keeper, a porter; porthoriaeth,
the office of a door-keeper.

Porthladd, porthfa, porth, a port, or haven; porthwys, a ferry-man, a
land-waiter, a tide-waiter.

Porth, porthiant, ymborth, subsistence, food; porthi, to feed.

Porthi, to bear, or carry.

Porthmon, a drover, a merchant; porthmonna, to buy and sell;
porthmonaeth, merchandise.

Posiâr, a fat hen.

Postolwyn, a horse-crupper.

Poten, the belly, or paunch.

Pothan, pothon, a young wolf.

Praff, thick; praffder, thickness.

Praidd, a flock of sheep, spoil; preiddio, to spoil, rob; preiddiawr,
preiddiwr, a robber, spoiler; preiddiad, a spoiling, foraging.

Prain, a court, palace, feast.

Prawf, praw, a proof, an experience; profi, to prove, to try.

Pregeth, a sermon, homily; pregethu, to preach.

Pren, a tree.

Prenfol, prennol, a little coffer, or casket, a deal wainscot box.

Prenial, a screen.

Prentis, an apprentice.

Pres, brass.

Pres, haste and speed-making.

Preseb, a manger.

Presen, presence; the present age; this world; presennol, present;
presenoldeb, presence.

Prestl, subtle, witty; prestledd, a subtle point, witty sayings.

Preswyl, habitation, dwelling; preswylio, to dwell, to stay.

Prew, a country, a province.

Prîd, dear; pridwerth, a price.

Prîd, a pledge; prido, to give a pledge.

Pridd, earth, mould; priddo, to cover with earth; priddell, a clod;
priddfaen, a brick, tile; priddgist, an earthen vessel; priddlestr, a
potter’s vessel.

Prif, first, principal; the first day of the moon, the golden number.

Prifio, to grow, to thrive.

Prin, rare, scarce, sparing, scarcely, sparingly; prinder, scarcity,
need, want; prinhau, to grow scarce, to decrease, to diminish.

Prinpan, to reason, to dispute.

Print, graving, print; printio, to engrave, to print.

Priod, proper, particular; private, married; priodi, to marry; priodas,
marriage, or wedlock; priodfab, priodasfab, a bridegroom; priodferch,
priodasretch, a bride; priodol, proper, the married state; priodoli, to
possess; priodoldeb, propriety.

Pris, price; prisio, appraise.

Profi, to taste, prove; profiad, probation, proof; profadwy, proved,
approved, provable.

Proffes, profession.

Prol, a prologue; proliad, he that speaks the prologue.

Propr, proper, elegant, neat.

Propriaid, little flies like gnats.

Prophwyd, a prophet.

Prudd, prudent, grave, serious, heavy, sad, melancholy; prudd-deb,
prudence; prudd-der, heaviness, sadness, melancholy; pruddhau, to mourn,
grieve.

Pryd, form, countenance, beautiful; prydus, prydferth, beautiful;
prydwen, a figure, image.

Pryd, time, season, opportunity; pryd o fwyd, a meal’s meat; prydlawn, in
good time, seasonable.

Pryder, pryderi, care, pensiveness; pryderu, gofalu, to cark and care.

Prydu, prydyddu, to make verses, to play the poet; prydydd, a poet.

Pryddest, a poem.

Pryf, a worm; pryfedog, pryfedus, full of vermin; pryfedu, to breed
worms; pryf cadachog, a palmerworm; prŷ’r dail, a palmer or canker worm;
pryf clustiau, an earwig, pryf dillad, gwyfyn, a moth; pryf penfrith, a
badger; pry’r ganwyll, pryf goleuad, a candle-worm; pryfigedd, perfigedd,
maw worms.

Pryffwnt, pryffynt, especial, chiefest.

Pryn, pryniad, a buying; prynu, to buy, redeem; prynwr, pryniawdr, a
redeemer, a buyer; prynedigaeth, redemption.

Prys, prysg, a grove, a nursery of young trees; prysgyll, hazel copse.

Pryseddu, to dwell, to stay.

Prysur, busy; prysuro, to hasten; prysurdeb, haste, business.

Pryswylio, preswylio, to dwell.

Puch, a desire, wish; pucho, to wish, desire; puchiant, a desire.

Pump, five.

Punt, a pound, or twenty shillings.

Pupur, pepper.

Pur, pure, clean, undefiled; purdeb, purity, sincerity; purdan,
purgatory; puro, to purify.

Purion, very well, fairly adapted.

Puror, an harmonious or pleasant tuner; puroriaeth, harmony, melody.

Putain, a harlot, an adulteress; puteindra, fornication, adultery.

Pwding, pudding.

Pwdr, rotten, corrupt, putrified; pydrni, rottenness, putrefaction;
pydru, to putrify, to rot.

Pwngi, a push, blister, pock.

Pŵl, blunt; pylu, to wax dull, or blunt.

Pwll, a pit, a lake.

Pwmpa, a great apple.

Pwmpl, a boss of a nail, or bridle.

Pwnc, point, note.

Pwnn, a pack, a burden.

Pwrcas, something got or bought.

Pwrs, a purse.

Pwt, stump, something short.

Pwy, who, what person, pwy bynnag, whosoever.

Pwyll, sense, discretion, prudence; pwyllo, to consider, to deliberate;
pwyllog, prudent, discreet.

Pwynt, health; amhwynt, weakness, sickness, pwyntio, to make fat, or to
be fatted.

Pwyntl, a pencil.

Pwyo, to beat, or strike.

Pwys, a pound weight, a weight; pwyso, to weigh.

Pwyth, a reward or price.

Pwyth, a stitch; pwytho, to stitch, or sew.

Pybyr, strong, stout, strongly made; pybyrwch, strength, valour.

Pych, a distemper.

Pyd, danger; pydio, to be in danger, to encounter.

Pydew, a pit, muddy water.

Pyg, pitch; pygu, to pitch; pyglian, a cerecloth; pygliw, black as pitch.

Pylgain, plygain, cock’s-crowing, the twilight.

Pylor, pluor, gunpowder.

Pyllawg, pyllog, full of puddles.

Pymtheg, fifteen.

Pyncio, to note, sing, play.

Pynfarch, portcullis, a pack-horse; pynfarch melin, a mill dam.

Pynner, a weight, burden or pack; pynoreg, a pannel, a pack-saddle;
pynori, to pack up.

Pyr, lords.

Pyrnhawn, prydnawn, afternoon.

Pys, peas.

Pysg, pysgodyn, a fish; pysgodlyn, a fish-pond; pysgota, to fish.

Pythefnos, a fortnight.



R.


Rhaclyd, providence.

Rhaco, yonder.

Rhacgno, advice, premeditation.

Rhacter, resistance.

Rhâd, grace, gratis; rhadlawn, gracious, meek, gentle.

Rhaeadr, a cataract, _pl._ rheieidr; rhaeadru, to fall down violently.

Rhaff, a rope.

Rhag, from, before, lest; rhagbron, gerbron, before, in presence;
rhagachub, to come before; rhagddant, a fore-tooth; rhagddor, a hatch;
rhagddydd, rhagddynt, from them, rhagflaenu, achub y blaen, to be
beforehand with; rhagethol, to predestine; rhaglafar, prolocutory;
rhagynys, adjacent island; rhaglaw, a ruler, governor, or president;
rhaglawiaeth, government, rule, or presidency; rhaglith, a preface;
rhagwys, warning, premonition.

Rhagfyr, December.

Rhagod, to hinder, impediment; rhagodion, delays.

Rhagor, rhagoriaeth, pre-eminence, difference, exceeding, excellence;
rhagorol, excellent; rhagori, to excel; rhagorfraint, prerogative;
rhagorgamp, a perfect work of virtue, a deed well done.

Rhagre, to run.

Rhagtal, a frontlet, a forehead cloth.

Rhagu, to contradict, to deny.

Rhai, some, some few, several.

Rhaib, greediness; rheibio, rheibo, to eat greedily, bewitch.

Rhaid, needful, necessary; rheidus, needy, poor; rheidwy, necessity.

Rhaidd, rheiddun, a spear, a lance; rheiddiawr, a spearman.

Rhaith, an oath, a vow, law; rheithiwr, a swearer; rhaith gwlad, common
law.

Rhamant, divination, romance; rhamanta, to conjure, tell a tale.

Rhan, a part, portion; rhannu, to part, divide; rhannog, a partaker;
rhandir, a lot, or hereditary part; rhandwy, a portion, or part.

Rhanc, desire, greed, content.

Rhasgl, an instrument to shave wood with; a garter.

Rhaw, a spade, shovel.

Rhawd, course, career, path.

Rhawd, rhawter, a troop, company.

Rhawg, a long while.

Rhawn, _sing_, rhownyn, coarse hair, the hair of a horse’s tail.

Rhawth, greediness, greedy.

Rhe, to run; rheawdr, rhedwr, a runner; rhedeg, to run; rhedegwr, rhedwr,
a runner; rhedfa, a race; rhedegfain, rhedegfan, to run up and down.

Rhebydd, a governor, a lord.

Rhech, a fart.

Rhedweli, artery, vein.

Rhedyn, ferns, brakes; rhedyneg, rhedynogdir, ferny ground.

Rhêf, thick, great; rhefedd, thickness.

Rhefawg, a withe, chain.

Rheflog, spoil.

Rhefr, anus; rhefrwym, costive.

Rheffyn, a halter, a cord.

Rhêg, a gift.

Rheg, a curse; rhegi, rhegu, to curse.

Rhegain, whisper, murmur.

Rhegen, a quail.

Rheng, rhenc, a rank; rhencio, to make into a rank.

Rheibio, to eat greedily.

Rheiddiawr, a spear-man.

Rhelyw, a relic.

Rhemial, muttering, babbling.

Rhemp, excess, wickedness.

Rhemwth, a paunch, glutton.

Rhên, a lord, a peer.

Rhen, rhennaid, a quart measure.

Rheol, a rule, or government; rheoli, to rule, or govern.

Rhes, rhestr, a row, a rank.

Rhesel, a rack, or manger.

Rheswm, a reason.

Rhethr, rhethren, a spear, a lance; rhethrawr, a spear-man.

Rheufedd, wealth, riches.

Rhew, frost; rhewi, to freeze.

Rhewin, ruin; rhewiniaw, destroy.

Rhewydd, lechery, lascivious.

Rhî, lord, peer, baron; rhiaidd, rhieiddawg, noble, generous.

Rhial, rheiol, royal, noble.

Rhiain, _pl._ rhianedd, a virgin, a maid.

Rhiallu, a hundred thousand.

Rhiawdr, a lord, a baron.

Rhibib, a hautboy.

Rhician, rhincian, a gnashing.

Rhidels, rhidens, ridens, a fringe.

Rhidio, to rut in rutting-time.

Rhidyll, a coarse sieve.

Rhidys, rill, narrow pipe.

Rhieni, parents, ancestors, an offspring, posterity.

Rhif, a number; rhifo, to number; rhifed, rhifedi, a number.

Rhifwnt, a yellow, or golden colour; jaundice.

Rhigal = rhial.

Rhigod, a pillory.

Rhigol, a trench; rhigoli, to trench.

Rhigwm, a long tale, or story.

Rhingyll, apparitor, sergeant.

Rhill, a rank, or order.

Rhimyn, a rhyme; rim.

Rhin, a secret, a mystery; rhiniau, enchantments, charms; rhinwedd,
sacrament, virtue; rhinweddol, virtuous, gentle.

Rhinc, rhincyn, a noise, a crashing, a gnashing; rhincian, rhician, to
make a noise, to crash, to gnash.

Rhiniog, hiniog, a threshold.

Rhintach, toothless, without teeth.

Rhisg, rhisgl, bark of trees.

Rhistyll, a horse comb, a curry comb; rhistyllio, to curry a horse.

Rhîth, apparition, form, pretence, embryo; rhithio, to appear.

Rhocas, a young man, lad.

Rhôch, a noise, a roaring.

Rhod, a wheel.

Rhodio, to walk; rhodiad, rhodienwr, a walker, also a vagabond;
rhodianna, to walk about, to range.

Rhodl, rhodol, an oar; rhodoli, to row.

Rhodres, pomp, vain-glory, boasting; rhodresu, to boast, brag; rhodresus,
rhodreslyd, given to boasting, or bragging; rhodreswr, a boaster.

Rhodd, a gift; rhoddi, rhoi, to give, bestow; rhoddiad, a largess,
liberality; rhoddwr, a giver.

Rhoesaw, welcome; rhoesawu, to welcome.

Rhol, a roll; rholbren, a rolling-pin.

Rhon, a tail, spear, lance; rhonell, a tail; rhonwyn, white-tailed;
rhonell goch, the redstart.

Rhonca, loose, hollow.

Rhos, roses.

Rhos, _pl._ rhosydd, a moor.

Rhost, roast.

Rhuo, to roar; rhuad, a roaring; rhuadwr, a roarer.

Rhuchen, a thin skin, the web in the eye; rhuchio, to sift or sieve.

Rhudd, red, ruddy; rhuddo, to grow red, or ruddy; rhuddell, a rubric, so
called because printed in red letters, a ruddy stone to mark sheep with,
red ochre; rhudden, red mark; rhuddfa, red earth; rhuddfaog, rhuddawg,
reddish, of a bloody colour, crimson.

Rhuddin, rhudding, the heart or soundest part of a tree.

Rhuddion gwenith, wheat-bran.

Rhufain, Rome.

Rhufaog, a fighter.

Rhugl groen, hugl groen, a rattle made of stones in a dried undressed
skin to frighten horses, &c.

Rhugio, to shovel dirt or mire.

Rhull, liberal, swift, hasty, rash.

Rhumen, the paunch, the cud.

Rhuon, rhufon, a soldier.

Rhupai, an iron comb.

Rhus, a leaping, or skipping back; rhuso, to leap, or skip back, to stand
still as an ill qualified horse will do in defiance of his rider.

Rhut, rue.

Rhuthr, an assault, or leaping upon; rhuthro, to assault, or rush upon.

Rhuwch, a sieve, a cullender, or strainer.

Rhŵd, rust; rhydu, torust; rhydlyd, rusty.

Rhwng, between.

Rhwmp, an auger, or wimble.

Rhwnc, a snore.

Rhwning, pears.

Rhwnsi, a kind of horse.

Rhwth, wide, open; rhythu, to make wide, or open.

Rhwy, rhwyf, a king, a chief commander, a general of an army; abundance,
too much.

Rhwyd, a net; rhwydo, to ensnare.

Rhwydd, prosperous, ready, easy; rhwydd-deb, prosperity, good-luck;
rhwyddhau, to prosper, to make ready, or easy.

Rhwyf, an oar; rhwyfo, to row; rhwyfwr, a water-man, one that roweth.

Rhwyg, a rend; rhwygo, to rend.

Rhwyl, a palace.

Rhwyll, a mortice; rhwyllog, latticewise, like a net or window.

Rhwym, a bond; rhwymo, to bind.

Rhwymedi, remedy.

Rhwys, vigour, luxuriance.

Rhwysg, authority, rule.

Rhwystr, hindrance; rhwystro, to hinder; rhwystrys, entangled.

Rhy, too much, over, excessive.

Rhybuch, a desire, a wish; rhybucho, to desire, to wish.

Rhybuched, a gift.

Rhybwyth, wages, reward, the price or value of anything.

Rhybudd, warning; rhybuddio, to warn, admonish.

Rhybydd, bydd, it will be.

Rhych, a furrow; rhychdir, arable ground; rhychor, the right hand ox that
draweth.

Rhychwant, a span.

Rhyd, rhydle, a ford.

Rhyddain, a hind calf, a young deer.

Rhyderig, hwch ryderig neu lodig, a sow that desires the boar.

Rhydd, rhyddedawg, free, loose; rhyddid, rhydid, rhydd-did, liberty,
freedom; rhyddhau, to set free, to loose, undo, untie.

Rhyddirio, entreat, beseech.

Rhyddyn, rhyngthyn, rhyngddynt, between them.

Rhyfedd, wonderful; rhyfeddod, a wonder, a miracle; rhyfeddu, to admire,
to wonder.

Rhyfel, war; rhyfela, rhyfelu, to wage war; rhyfelwr, a warrior.

Rhyferad, drivelling.

Rhyferig = rhyderig.

Rhyferthwy, rhyfawrthin, a storm, tempest, deluge, inundation.

Rhyfyg, pride, arrogance, presumption; rhyfygu, to presume; rhyfygus,
proud, presumptuous.

Rhyg, rye.

Rhyged, liberal, prodigal.

Rhyglydd, rhygluddiant, rhygluddiad, merit; rhyglyddu, to deserve, to
give content.

Rhygn, a score made with chalk; rhygnbren, a piece of board to score
upon, a score.

Rhygnu, to saw.

Rhygoll, loss, damage.

Rhygyng, an ambling, or pacing; rhygyngog, given to amble, or pace;
rhygyngu, to amble, or pace.

Rhygylch, a compass, a course.

Rhyngu bôdd, to please, to give content.

Rhyladd, to kill.

Rhym, rhyn, mine, ours.

Rhymanta, to follow soothsayings, to divine by gathering of water and
sand on a certain night.

Rhyn, a hilt.

Rhynion, oats cleared of husks.

Rhynn, a very great cold, extremity of cold; rhynnu, to suffer extreme
cold, to be frozen with cold.

Rhynnawd, rhynnawdd, some, a few, not many.

Rhyodres, a babbling, or prating.

Rhysgyr, an assault, an endeavour.

Rhysedd, abundance, foolhardiness.

Rhysod, coals of fire.

Rhyswr, a champion, a wrestler, a hero, a savage.

Rhyw, somewhat, something, somebody, someone.

Rhyw, rhywogaeth, a stock, race, or lineage.

Rhyweilydd, vain, empty.

Rhywiog, generous, mild, gentle, fine, not coarse.



S.


Sach, a sack; sachlen, sachlian, sack-cloth.

Sad, firm, wise, discreet.

Sadell, a pannel, pack-saddle.

Sadwrn, Saturn, Saturday.

Sae, woollen, say.

Saen, plaster.

Saer coed, a carpenter; saer maen, a mason; saer niaeth, building,
architecture.

Saesneg, the English language.

Saeth, an arrow; saethu, to shoot; saethydd, an archer; saethyddiaeth,
archery.

Safn, a mouth; safnaid, a mouthful; safnrwth, having a wide mouth;
safnrythu, to extend, or dilate one’s mouth; safnog, having a great or
wide mouth, mouthed.

Saffrwm, saffron; saffrymu, to stain with saffron; saffrymog, of, or like
saffron, yellow.

Saffwy, a lance, a spear.

Saib, leisure; studious.

Said, seidyn, a tang, or that part that goeth into the haft of any weapon
or tool.

Saig, a dish, mess of meat; seigio, to provide and dress dishes of meat.

Sang, a pressing, a straining, a treading; sengi, sangu, to press, to
strain, to tread.

Sail, sylfaen, a foundation; seilio, sylfaenu, to lay a foundation;
seilddar, a prop, a pile driven into the earth.

Saim gwydd, goose-grease; seimlyd, greasy; seimio, to yield grease.

Sain, a sound; seinio, synio, to sound.

Sais, a Saxon, an Englishman.

Saith, seven.

Sâl, salw, vile, ignoble, sorry; salwedd, vileness, sordidness.

Saled, salad.

Sallwyr, llaswyr, psallwyr, psalmau, psalms.

Sann, syndod, amazement; astonishment; sannu, synnu, to be stupified, or
amazed.

Sant, a saint; santes, a she-saint; sanctaidd, holy; sancteiddio, to
sanctify; sancteiddrwydd, sanctification, holiness.

Sardio, to chide.

Sarhâd, disgrace; sarhâu, to disgrace.

Sarit, addition, the overplus, what is given over and above weight or
measure.

Sarllach, joy, gladness, mirth.

Sarn, a causeway, a pavement; sarnu, to pave, tread, trample.

Sarph, a serpent.

Sarrug, obstinate, dogged, stubborn; sarugrwydd, obstinacy, doggedness;
sarugyn, a boor.

Sâs, great, eminent.

Sathar, a satyr.

Sathr, a treading, or trampling; sathru, to tread, or trample; sathrfa, a
trodden place.

Saw, saf, safiad, sefydle, a station.

Sawd, war, a conflict; sawdiwr, a soldier, a warrior.

Sawdl, the heel.

Sawdurio, to join, solder.

Sawdd, a plunging, or dipping into, a sinking under water; soddi, suddo,
to plunge, or dip into.

Sawell, passage of a chimney.

Sawl, whoever.

Sawr, safr, sawyr, savour, taste, a smell; sawrio, to taste, to smell;
sawrus, savoury.

Saws, sauce.

Se = ys ef, so, thus.

Sebach, very small.

Sebon, soap; seboni, to lather; sebonllyd, bedaubed with soap.

Sêch, _fem. of_ sych, dry.

Sechi, sachu, to fill up a sack.

Sêf, ys ef, to wit, that is.

Sefnig, the gullet.

Sefyll, to stand; sefyllfa, a station; sefyllian, to stand still.

Sefydlu, to place, to establish; sefydlog, constant, firm, established;
dŵr sefydlog, standing water.

Sefrdan, syfrdan, giddy-brained, stupid.

Segur, segurllyd, slothful, idle; seguryd, idleness, leisure.

Sengi, sang, press, tread, trample.

Sengl, single.

Seibiannu, ceasing from labour, or business; seibiant, leisure.

Seimio, to yield grease, to drop grease.

Seinio, synio, to make a sound.

Seintwar, sanctuary.

Seirch, horse trappings, the harness of a horse, a saddle.

Seirian, bright, sparkling.

Seith, seven.

Seithug, in vain, void; seithugio, to disappoint, to frustrate, to do in
vain; seithugiaeth, disappointment, a frustrating.

Sêl, a watch; selu, to espy, to watch; selwr, a scout, beholder; seliad,
crafty, quick-sighted; seldrem, prospect, a handful, bundle.

Sêl, a seal; selio, to seal.

Seler, cellar.

Selgyngian, to speak softly, to mutter, murmur.

Selsig, sausages, or puddings.

Selwedd, vileness, baseness.

Semi, _fem._ of syml, simple.

Semlant, countenance, aspect.

Senn, a rebuke, chiding; sennu, to chide.

Senedd, a synod, an assembly, the sanhedrim amongst the Jews; seneddwr, a
senator, or high councillor.

Senw, honour, profit, benefit.

Sêr, stars; seren, a star; serliw, starlight; serlo, starglow;
seroliaeth, the starry system.

Serch, love, affection; a concubine, an adulterer; serchog, kind, loving,
amorous, affectionate; serchu, to love, to affect, or fancy.

Serch, notwithstanding, in spite of.

Serfyll, like to fall, decay, or perish.

Seri, horses.

Serr, cleddyf, a sword.

Serrigl, sienigl, torn, broken.

Serth, steep, dangerous, also lewd; serthallt, a precipice, lewdness,
lewd discourses; serthair, blasphemy.

Serw, bright, glittering.

Seuthug = seithug, in vain.

Sew, broth, pottage.

Si, a noise, a hissing.

Siad, iâd, the head, pate.

Siaff, a lord’s son.

Siambr, a chamber.

Siamp, a mark, mole, freckle, blemish on the body.

Siampl, an example; siampler, patrwm, a pattern, sample.

Siapri, merry words, a jest.

Siarad, to speak, talk, or discourse; siarad, talking; siaradus,
talkative, full of words; siaradwr, a talkative man.

Sias, a chase at tennis-play.

Sibrwd, sisial, a low burring noise.

Sicio, to stir or rub linen in lather.

Sicr, sure, firm, stable, safe; sicrwydd, security, certainty; sicrhau,
to confirm, establish, assure, certify.

Sidan, silk; sidanblu, down; sidanu, to coax; sidanen, a fine woman.

Sidell, a wheel.

Sider, fringe, also woollen rags; sideru, to make holes, to make a thing
all to rags; siderog, full of holes, or fringes.

Sieff, a sister’s son.

Sienigl = serrigl, torn, bruised.

Siffrwd = sibrwd, to whisper.

Sigl, a shaking; siglo, to shake; siglen, a quagmire.

Sigo, ysigo, to crush, or bruise.

Sil, silyn, an offspring.

Silio, to hull grain.

Siloffr, red lead, cinnabar.

Sillaf, a syllable; sillafu, to join syllables.

Silltio, to join; silltaeren, a link.

Silltydd, offspring.

Simach, ape, monkey.

Simant, mortar, cement.

Simera, to play, to trifle away one’s time.

Simnai, a chimney.

Simwr, a mantle, such as knights of the garter wear.

Sin, a temple where kings are buried, alms.

Sindal, fine linen, cambric.

Sinidr, sinidro, dross, or refuse of metal tried by the fire.

Sinobl, red lead, or vermilion.

Sinsir, ginger.

Sio, to hiss.

Siobyn, a tuft, a bunch.

Siol, skull, pate.

Siom, a deceit, sham; siomi, to deceive, sham; siomgar, deceitful.

Sionc, agile, active.

Sirian, cherries.

Sirig, silk.

Siriol, bright, cheerful.

Sisel, bran.

Sisial, sisyffwl, whispering, muttering.

Sitrach, rags, or fringe.

Siwgr, sugar.

Siwrnai, a journey.

Socyn, of an indifferent bigness, somewhat under the middle stature.

Soddi, suddo, to sink down.

Soeg, malt; soegen, soeglud, moist, that is steeped, or watered.

Sofl, stubbles; soflyn, a stubble; sofliar, a quail.

Som, siom, a sham, or deceit; somi, siomi, to sham, to deceive; somgar,
siomgar, deceitful, diverse in conditions, wayward; somgarwch,
siomgarwch, peevishness, diverseness, waywardness; somgraru, to be angry;
somedigaeth, siomder, imposture, deceit, disappointment.

Sôn, a sound, rumour, also mention; sonio, synio, to sound, or make a
noise; soniawr, syniog, loud, making a great noise.

Sopen, a bundle of straw, or hay.

Sorod, dross.

Sorr, soriant, wrath, anger, indignation; sorri, to be angry or
displeased; soriad, angry, moved.

Sorth, _fem. of_ swrth, dull.

Sôs, a sauce.

Sothach, dross, sweepings.

Sôd, sut, a form, shape, fashion.

Sucan, the smallest drink made of malt, a drink made of vinegar and
water, gruel, flummery.

Sudd, juice, sap.

Suddo, to sink, or drown; suddiant, suddiad, a drowning, sinking.

Sug, sugyn, sap, or juice.

Sugaethan, a poultice.

Sugn, a suckling; sugno, to suck; sugn-fôr, quick-sands.

Sul, Sunday; Sulgwyn, Whitsunday.

Sum, swm, a sum.

Suo, to bring asleep, to lull asleep.

Sur, sour; suro, to grow sour; surni, sourness; surdoes, a leaven;
surdrwnc, urine; suran, sorrel.

Sut, form, fashion, manner.

Sŵch, the plough-share.

Swga, filthy, sluttish.

Swllt, a shilling; swllt, a king’s exchequer, or treasure; swlldy,
sylldy, the exchequer.

Swmbwl, a prick, or point set in a goad to prick oxen forward; symbylu,
symlu, to prick, or spur.

Sŵn, a sound, or noise; synio, to make a sound.

Swp, a heap; sypio, to make a heap; sypyn, a little heap.

Swrn, a little hammer, a little twig of a shrub, the lock of the foot.

Swrn, somewhat, a little while, a little; syrnyn, a little while.

Swrth, sleepy, sluggish, suddenly; syrthni, a slothful heaviness.

Swrwd, sorod, dross.

Swta, diswta, sudden, suddenly.

Swydd, office, magistracy; swyddogaeth, an office; swyddog, swyddwr, an
officer, a magistrate; swyddwial, a sceptre.

Swyf, swyfen, cream, barm, yeast.

Swyn, an enchantment, a remedy by enchantment; swyno, swynogli, enchant,
bless, heal.

Sŷ, sydd, is, or that which is.

Syberw, proud, liberal, bounteous; syberwyd, liberality, bounty.

Sybwb, ys wb wb, fie, fie, away, get thee hence.

Sybwch, a he-goat.

Sybwll, a whirlpit, gulf.

Sych, dry, barren; sychder, dryness, barrenness; sychu, to dry, to wax
dry, to wither; syched, thirst; sychedu, to thirst; sychedig, thirsty;
sychedfod, a great thirst; sychin, dry weather.

Sydd, is, or which is.

Syddyn, tyddyn, tenement.

Syfi, mefus, strawberries.

Syflyd, to move, or to be moved.

Syfrdan, dull, stupid; syfrdandod, stupidity; syfrdanu, to stupify.

Syg, a chain.

Syganai, he said.

Sygn, a celestial sign.

Sylw, sight, a vision.

Sylwedd, substance; sylweddol, substantial.

Syllty, exchequer.

Syllu, sylliaw, to behold, to regard.

Sym, whole; symio, to feel, understand.

Symlant = semlant, aspect.

Symlyn, a fool, an idiot; symlen, ffolog, a she-fool, or idiot; symlogen,
a little harlot.

Symud, to move; symudiad, a moving, motion; symudo, to move; symudliw,
motley.

Syniaw, to perceive, to feel, to suffer.

Synio, to sound, or make a noise.

Syndal, fine linen cloth.

Synn, dull, stupid; synnu, to amaze, to wax dull, or stupid; synedigaeth,
syndod, amazement.

Synna, behold, lo.

Synnwyr, sense, discretion; synwyrbell, prudence.

Sypio, to heap together; sypyn, a little heap.

Sŷr, sêr, stars.

Syr, syre, a lord.

Syrch, serch, affection.

Syrn, partly, rather.

Syrth, the bowels.

Syrthio, to fall; syrthni, drowsiness, sluggishness.

Syth, stiff, sturdy, bolt upright; sythu, to grow stiff, to erect
upwards; syth, a stiffening, starch.

Syw, handsome, wise, learned.

Sywedydd, an astrologer.

Sywidw, titmouse.



T.


Tabar, a long coat, or cloak.

Tabl, table.

Tabwrdd, a timbrel, tabard.

Tacl, an arrow, shaft, or dart; taclau, darts, ornaments; taclu, tacluso,
to adorn, to amend.

Tachwedd, a quantity, a residue, something; tachweddu, diweddu, gorffen,
to consummate, to end.

Tachwedd, November.

Tad, a father; tadog, tadol, fatherly; tadogaeth, fatherhood, paternity;
tadogi, tadu, to protect, or defend them that are falsely accused;
tadwys, a father, or that which begets among beasts.

Taen, taenell, a sprinkling about; taenellu, to sprinkle; taenu, tanu, to
scatter, or spread abroad.

Taeog, rude, villainous, sullen.

Taer, importunate, earnest, instant; taeredd, taerni, taeri, importunity,
earnestness; taer-wrys, a great conflict, or contention.

Tafarn, a tavern; tafarnwr, a vintner, also an ale-house keeper.

Tafell, a piece, or slice of anything; tafellu, to cut to slices.

Taflu, to throw, cast, or fling.

Taflod, a garret, a loft, or scaffold; taflod y genau, the roof or palate
of the mouth.

Taflodiad, an interjection, or part of speech.

Tafod, a tongue; tafodiog, that is well spoken, or hath skill in several
languages, a pleader, solicitor; tafodogaeth, advocature.

Tagell, a double chin.

Tagfa, a strangling; tagu, to strangle.

Taid, a grandfather.

Tail, dung; teilo, to dung.

Tain, a river.

Tair, three females.

Taith, a journey; teithio, to take a journey, or ride a circuit.

Tal, talcen, a forehead; talog, having a large forehead; talgudyn, a
top-knot; tal-dal, tête-à-tête; talaith, a garland, coronet; taleithio,
to crown, to set a garland on; talar, a head-land.

Tâl, taliad, taledigaeth, a payment; talu, to pay; talawdr, talwr, a
paymaster.

Tal, tall, high of stature.

Talaith, region, province.

Talbos, a shield, or buckler.

Talch, _pl._ teilchion, piece, fragment, grit, coarse grain.

Talm, a space, some, part; talmu, approach, or draw near the end.

Talmithr, suddenly.

Talp, telpyn, a lump.

Talwas, a shield, or buckler.

Talwrn, a small open space, a little floor, a bed in a garden.

Tam, tama, tamaid, bite, mouthful; tameidio, to cut in morsels or bits.

Tampyr, a taper.

Tân, fire; tanbaid, hot, fiery; tandawd, eirias o dân, great fire, or
flame; tandde, an inflammation; tanlliw, growing hot, also new;
tanllwyth, a blaze; tanllestr, lanthorn.

Tan, under; tanodd, odditanodd, below.

Tanc, peace; tangnef, tangnefedd, peace; tangnefeddu, heddychu, to make
peace, to reconcile; tangnefeddus, peaceable, quiet; tangwystl, pledge,
hostage.

Tansadd, rhan fechan, a little part.

Tant, a bow string, the string of a musical instrument.

Tanu, to spread; taniad, a spreading.

Tapin, tapina, tapestry, a covering; tapinwr, a tapestry weaver.

Taplas, game, dance.

Taradr, an auger, or piercer.

Taran, a thunderclap.

Tardd, a breaking out; tarddu, to break out; tarddellu, to boil, or
bubble up, like the sea in a storm.

Tarf, scattering; tarfu, to scatter.

Tarian, a shield, buckler.

Tario, to dwell, to stay, to remain.

Tarleisio, to echo, or sound again.

Tarlwng, tarlwnc, darlwnc, traflwnc, a draught, a draught of drink;
tarlyncu, to swallow down.

Taro, taraw, to strike.

Tarth, a fog, an exhalation.

Tarw, a bull.

Tasg, a task; tasgu, to tax, to task.

Tau, eiddo ti, thy, thine.

Tau, he will hold his peace; taw, hold thy peace; tewi, to hold one’s
peace, or be silent; tawedog, silent.

Taw, that.

Tawch, haze, exhalation.

Tawdd, a melting; toddi, to melt.

Tawel, silent, quiet; tawelwch, silence, tranquillity.

Tawl, toliant, a toll, cessation; toil, tolio, tolli, to make less, to
wax less; toliad, hard, niggard, near; tolo, a pound weight.

Tawlbwrdd, a draught-board.

Tebyg, like.

Tedd, range, row.

Techu, to lie hid.

Têg, fair, beautiful, serene; tegan, a jewel, bauble, toy; tegwch,
beauty, clearness, serenity, fairness, fair weather; tegychu, to
beautify, to clear up, or become fair weather; teghau, to beautify,
pacify; tegwch, a comely countenance.

Teiliwr, a tailor.

Teilo, to dung the ground.

Teilwng, worthy; teilyngdod, dignity, worthiness; teilyngu, to vouchsafe,
to think worthy.

Teimladwy, palpable, that may be handled, or felt with the hand; teimlo,
to feel with the hand.

Teisban, a tapestry, the gristle that parts the nostrils.

Teisban, bed, quilt, covering; teisban-teulu, family stock; teisbantyle,
homestead.

Teisen, a cake.

Teithi, qualities, traits; teithi gwraig, menses.

Teithiawg, movable, unstable; teithio, to take a journey, to travel.

Têl, telaid, a certain measure of corn in South Wales, containing sixteen
English quarts.

Telaid, telediw, worthy, fair, beautiful, comely; telediwrwydd, dignity,
comeliness, beauty.

Telging, a fall; _or_ fine.

Telm, a toy, a snare.

Telpyn, a lump, mass.

Telyn, a harp; telynwr, a harper.

Teml, a temple.

Tenau, thin, slender, lean, rare; teneuder, slenderness, rarity;
teneuhau, to make thin, or slender, to make scarce.

Tenewyn, the flank.

Tenlliff, linsey-wolsey.

Tennyn, a cord, string, halter.

Têr, clean, neat; teru, to purify.

Terch, torch, a collar, chain, loop.

Terfenydd, a cow desiring a bull.

Terfyn, a land-mark, bound, partition; terfynu, to set a bound, to limit,
to partition between, to end.

Terfysg, a tumult, insurrection, disturbance; terfysgu, to disturb, to
make a sedition.

Terment, interment.

Termud, very silent.

Terrig, rough, severe, thick; terrig ar sodlau, dirt on one’s heels.

Terwyn, strong, bold, hot; terwynnu, to grow hot, to glow.

Terydr, the sun-beams.

Terydd, swift, nimble, sharp.

Teryll, frowning, piercing.

Tês, sunshine; tesog, hot.

Tesach, to sport and play the wag.

Tesgyll, a stack.

Testyn, an epigraph, inscription, title, an argument, scoff,
mocking-stock, text.

Têth, a teat or pap.

Teulu, a family; teuluaidd, familiar, domestic, hospitable; teuluwriaeih,
household order, or government; teuluwas, a household servant; teuluedd,
peace, concord.

Tew, thick, gross, fat; tewder, tewdwr, tewedd, thickness, fatness;
tewhâu, tewychu, to fatten, or wax fat, to thicken; tewban, thickened by
fulling, a thick-leaved plant.

Tewdws, y twrr tewdws, Pleiads.

Tewi, to be silent, to hold one’s peace.

Teyrn, a king, tyrant; teyrnaidd, royal, kingly, imperial; teyrnas, a
kingdom; teyrnasu, to rule, or govern a kingdom; teyrnwialen, a sceptre;
teyrnged, tribute.

Ti, di, tydi, thou.

Tiboeth, the book of Twrog, with a piece of jet on its cover.

Tid, a chain.

Tin, breech, fundament; tinbais, a petticoat; tinsigl, wagtail; tindroed,
a diver, didapper.

Tinc, a tinkle; tincian, to ring, or tinkle.

Tiol, diol, ôl, a track, or footstep.

Tîr, land, inheritance, farm, tenement; tiriog, rich in land; tiriogaeth,
a territory; tirio, to land, or come ashore; tirio fel mochyn, to dig up
the earth like a swine; tirdra, land detention, land grabbing.

Tirf, lively, quick, fat.

Tirion, gentle, courteous, pleasant; tiriondeb, tirionwch, courteousness,
pleasantness.

Tisio, to sneeze.

Titen, diden, a breast, or teat.

Titiaid, _sing._ titen, gnats.

Tithau, thou also.

Tlawd, poor, needy; tlodi, poverty.

Tlŵs, a jewel, pretty, pleasant.

To, thatch of a house; toi, to thatch; towr, a thatcher.

Tô, a lay, or pile.

Toc, immediately.

Toc, a hat or cap.

Tocio, to clip or shear.

Toddaid, a kind of verse.

Toddi, to melt.

Toes, dough; toesi, to become dough, to make dough.

Tolc, a hollowness, or dent; tolcio, to make hollow, to dent.

Tolcio, to butt.

Tolchen, a clot.

Tolfwrdd, chessboard.

Tolgorn, a clarion.

Toli, to assuage.

Tolo, a pound weight.

Toll, a toll or custom; tolli, to take toll or custom.

Tom, dirt, mud, mire; tomawg, tomlyd, dirty, muddy, miry; tomi, to
bespatter with dirt, to dung; tomen, a dunghill.

Tôn, a note, tune, or accent.

Toniar, a board, plank, a wave.

Tonn, a wave, surface, an outside; tonnog, full of surges, or waves,
heady, dogged.

Tonn, _fem. of_ twnn, broken.

Tonnen, the skin, a shell, outside of anything.

Topyn, the hair, or forehead.

Tôr, toron, toryn, a cloak, coat, mantle; toronog, wearing a cloak.

Torch, a collar, chain; torchi, to wreathe, twist, or wrap; torchog,
wreathed, having a chain.

Toreth, abundance, increase.

Torf, a multitude.

Torfynyglu, to behead, to hurl, or throw down headlong.

Torlan, a river bank.

Torment, tournament.

Torpell, tolchen, a lump, or clot of any thick matter.

Torr, toriad, a fraction, breaking or dividing, a cut, cessation,
education, a taming or breaking of a horse; torri, to break, to cut.

Torr, belly; tordyn, full bellied; torrog, great with young; torogi, to
conceive, to become with young; torgoch, rochet, red gurnard; torllwyth,
a litter.

Torredwynt, troedwynt, trowynt, a whirlwind.

Tors, torsed, covering, rug.

Tors, _pl._ torsie, torches.

Torth, a loaf.

Torstain, gross about the middle.

Tost, hard, severe; tostedd, severity; toster, soreness, severity.

Tostur, tosturus, to be pitied; tosturi, pity, compassion; tosturio, to
take pity.

Towr, a thatcher.

Tra, while, until, above, beyond.

Trablawdd, very swift, or nimble.

Trabludd, disturbance, tumult, war, conflict.

Trachefn, again.

Trachwant, lust, covetousness.

Trachwres, too much heat.

Tradwy, three days hence, three days after.

Traean, a third part.

Traensiwr, a trencher.

Traenter, a brewer.

Traetur, traitor.

Traeth, traethell, the sands bordering upon the sea.

Trahthu, mynegi, to declare; traethawd, a treatise, discourse.

Trafael, labour, endeavour; trafaelu, to labour, to work.

Traflwnc, a great draught; traflyncu, to swallow extremely.

Trafn, course, turn, impulse.

Trafod, labour, trouble, a conflict, or battle; trafodi, to strive,
fight.

Trafferth, trouble, concerns, business; trafferthu, to trouble, to cark
and care; trafferthus, full of troubles.

Tragor, superfluity, abundance.

Tragywydd, tragywyddol, eternal, everlasting; tragywyddoldeb,
tragywyddolder, eternity; tragywyddoli, to perpetuate, to make immortal,
or eternal.

Traha, trahausder, contempt, arrogance, pride, the highest injury;
trahaus, proud, that despiseth others.

Trai, a decrease, ebbing of the sea; treio, to decrease, ebb.

Traidd, a carrying, or conveying over, a passing by; treiddio, to pass,
convey over, pierce.

Traill, a revolution; treillio, to roll, or tumble.

Train, conversation, a lingering, or delaying.

Trais, oppression, rapine, rape; treisio, to ravish, oppress.

Traith, a treatise, or discourse.

Trallod, adversity, trouble; trallodi, to disturb, to vex or trouble;
trallodus, troubled, vexed.

Tramgwydd, a slip, slide, or fall, a misfortune; tramgwyddo, to fall,
slip, or slide, to meet with misfortunes.

Tramor, beyond sea.

Tramwy, to frequent, to go often.

Tranc, trang, end, death; trengi, trengu, marw, to end, to die.

Trancell, a draught in drinking.

Trannoeth, to-morrow, the day following.

Trâs, kindred, alliance; trasol, having many kindred, or allies.

Traseifiad, abiding still, firm, perpetual.

Traserch, too much love, lost love.

Traul, expense, charge, cost; treulio, gwario, to spend, waste, consume;
treulfawr, sumptuous, costly; treulgar, lavish, prodigal.

Trawd, trawdd, a walking, pace.

Traws, tros, trosodd, over; traws, trawsedd, cross, overthwart; trawsedd,
trawsder, trawsineb, oppression, iniquity.

Trawst, a beam.

Trawswch, moustache.

Trebl, threefold, the treble in music.

Trec, an ornament, an instrument; trecyn, an instrument, or tool.

Trech, stronger, mightier; trechaf, strongest, mightiest; trechu, to
overcome, or subdue.

Tref, a town; trefan, a little town, or village; trefad, an abode or
dwelling, a house, or cottage, to dwell or abide; treftad, treftadaeth,
patrimony, inheritance; treftadol, pertaining to inheritance, or
succession; trefred, trefad, one’s house, or abode.

Trefn, order; trefnu, to order, direct, or dispose; trefnus, well
appointed, decent, in good order.

Treigl, treingl, a revolution, rolling, or tumbling; treiglo, treinglo,
to roll, or tumble; treiglad, treigl ddyn, treingl ddyn, a vagabond,
wanderer.

Treisiad, a bullock, an oppressor; treisig, trais, oppression, extortion.

Trem, an aspect, or countenance.

Tremyg, contempt, reproach.

Tremyniad, a vision, or phantasy.

Tren, impetuous, furious.

Trennydd, trannoeth, two days hence, the next day after to-morrow.

Três, labour, business, trouble.

Três, a drag, a chain.

Trestyl, a trestle.

Trew, sneezing; trewi, to sneeze.

Trewyn, athrywyn, to part, or separate them that fight.

Tri, three; trioedd, we three, they three; tri-dyblyg, threefold;
tri-ysig, three inches.

Triban, a stanza.

Trigo, to dwell, starve, die; trigrias, trigrant, habitation, abode.

Trimud, silent.

Trîn, to handle, order, tend, nurse; labour, quarrel, battle.

Trindod, trinity.

Tripa, the entrails, bowels.

Trist, heavy, mournful, sad; tristwch, tristyd, sadness, sorrow; tristau,
to mourn, make sad.

Tro, a change, turn; troad, conversion, turning; troi, to turn, convert,
roll; trofa, a turning.

Troch, _fem. of_ trwch, broken.

Trochfa, a bathing, or dipping; trochi, to dip, bathe, baptize.

Troed, a foot; troediog, having feet, a footman, page; troednoeth,
barefooted; troedfedd, a foot, or twelve inches; troedog, a snare, or
fetter; troedlath, troedlas, the treadle of a weaver’s loom.

Troell, a spinning-wheel; troellog, round as a wheel.

Troethi, to make water.

Trogen, a tick.

Tros, for, above, over.

Trosedd, transgression; troseddu, to transgress.

Trosglwydd, a carrying over, a transportation; trosglwyddo, to carry
over, or transport.

Trosi, to turn, tumble, disquiet.

Trosol, a crowbar.

Trostan, a long pole, spear.

Troterth, tuthiwr, a trotter; trotian, to trot.

Trothwy, a threshold, groundsil.

Trowynt, a whirlwind.

Tru, truan, poor, weak, helpless, miserable; truaf, truanaf, most
miserable, most wretched; truenyn, a poor miserable man; truanu,
truanhau, to have pity, or compassion; trugar, trugarog, merciful,
compassionate; trugaredd, mercy; trugarhau, to have mercy, to take pity.

Trul, a drill.

Trull, a buttery, cellar; trulliad, a butler; trullio, to draw drink.

Trum, the top of a hill, a hill, balk, ridge between two furrows;
trumain, trumiog, ridged, as ploughed land.

Truth, fawning, flattery; truthio, to fawn, flatter; truthain, a
flatterer.

Trwcio, to fail, fall.

Trwch, a cut, trench, gash; broken, maimed, lame; trychu, to cut asunder,
gash.

Trwch, an unhappy, unfortunate man; trychni, trychineb, mishap,
misfortune, calamity.

Trwm, heavy, weighty, sad, sorrowful; trymder, heaviness, sorrow,
sadness; trymhau, to wax heavy, to be sad, to make sad; trwmluog,
trymluog, dull, heavy, sluggish.

Trwmpl, a trumpet.

Trwnc, urine.

Trwp, a milk-pail.

Trwsa, a truss, pack.

Trwsgl, clumsy, untrimmed, ill proportioned.

Trwsio, to dress, repair; trwsiad, apparel, decking, trimming; trwsiadu,
to clothe, trim, deck; trwsiadus, well clothed.

Trwyadl, ready, quick, dexterous.

Trwst, a sound, noise; trystio, to make a noise, or sound.

Trwstan, twrstan, unhappy, unfortunate, clumsy.

Trwy, by, through.

Trwydded, license, liberty, freedom, a lease; trwyddedawg, one that is
made free, one having free admission.

Trwyddew, an auger.

Trwyll, ring.

Trwyn, a nose; trwyno, to smell close to a thing.

Trwyth, a decoction; trwytho, to decoct, steep.

Try-, through, thorough.

Trybaeddu, to daub thoroughly.

Trybedd, a brand iron, trivet.

Trybelid, trybelydr, ready, quick, busy; luminous, conspicuous.

Trybestod, business, great travail, busy work.

Trycio, to flag, fail.

Trychni, trychineb, misfortune.

Trychu, to cut asunder, gash.

Trychwydd, frail, brittle.

Trydar, to chirp, chirping.

Trydedd, trydydd, the third.

Trydon, full toned.

Trydwll, bored through.

Tryfal, a triangle.

Tryfer, a trident.

Tryfrith, garnished with divers colours, full of spots, numerous.

Trylen, learned.

Tryleu, heaps, bundles, faggots.

Trylew, most strong, valiant.

Tryliw, of one and the same colour.

Trylwyn, quick, ready.

Trymbar, a heavy lance, or spear.

Trymder, heaviness, sorrow, grief.

Trymdde, weighty, heavy, sad.

Trymfryd, sorrow.

Trymluog, slow, dull, drowsy.

Trymyniad, a boar.

Trysor, treasure.

Tryth, _pl._ of treth, taxes.

Trythyll, wanton, lascivious; trythyllwch, lust.

Trywanu, to pierce, stab.

Trywedd, track, scent.

Tu, a side; tuedd, a coast, an inclination; tueddu, to incline.

Tuchan, to lament, groan, groaning; tuchanllyd, given to repine.

Tud, the earth; tudwedd, land, or soil; tudlath, a perch, or pole.

Tudfach, a stilt.

Tudded, a cover, or coverlet.

Tuell, cover, covert.

Tuli, a shroud, horse-cloth.

Tunnell, a ton.

Turio, to root up the earth as hogs.

Turn, a turn; turnio, to turn; turnen, a turned vessel.

Turs, snout, bill.

Turtur, a turtle-dove.

Tusw, a gripe, handful, a painter’s pencil.

Tuth, tuthiad, the trotting of a horse, &c.; tuthio, to trot, run;
tuthiog, given to trot.

Twca, a coulter, knife.

Tŵf, twddf, tyfiad, tyfiant, growth, increase; tyfu, to grow.

Twng, an oath; tyngu, to swear; tyngu anudon, to forswear.

Twlc, a little cottage, hovel, stye.

Twll, a hole, cave, den; tyllu, to pierce; tyllog, having holes.

Twmpath, a bush.

Twnc, a food rent.

Twnn, _fem. of_ tonn, broken, rent, torn.

Tŵr, a tower, castle; twred, a little tower.

Twrch, a hog, burrower; twrch daear, a mole.

Twred, a kneading trough.

Twrf, twrdd, a noise, stir, thunder; tyrfu, to clamour, to riot.

Twrf, tyrfiad, a wresting of a sinew, a sprain; tyrfu, to sprain, wrest
aside.

Twrlla, a hill mouse.

Twrllaes, torllaes, paunch bellied.

Twrr, a heap, pile; tyrru, to heap, or pile together.

Twrstan, trwstan, unhappy, unfortunate.

Twt, hold your peace, silence.

Twtnai, an iron grey colour.

Twtnais, neat, handsome, well decked.

Twyg, a garment, apparel.

Twyl, fear.

Twyll, deceit, fraud; twyllo, to deceive; twyllodrus, deceitful;
twyllgynghanedd, a false concord in a verse; twyll-odl, an improper
metre.

Tulath, a purlin.

Twymn, twymyn, warm; twymno, to heat; twymder, heat; twymdwyro, twymno,
to make hot.

Twyn, hill, hillock, toft.

Twysg, some part, some portion; twysgen, a small part.

Twysgo, to gather, heap together.

Twyso, to lead; twysog, a prince.

Ty, a house; tyaid, a family, a house full.

Tyb, opinion, esteem, suspicion; diletyb, free from suspicion; tybiaid,
tybio, tybygu, to esteem, think, suppose, suspect.

Tycio, to profit, prosper; tyciant, prosperity, good luck; tyciannus,
prosperous, lucky.

Tydi, dydi, thou.

Tyddyn, a farm, tenement.

Tyfod, tywod, sand.

Tyfu, to grow.

Tynged, tynghedfen, fortune, fate, destiny; tynghedu, to adjure, to
command in God’s name.

Tyngu, to swear.

Tyle, a knoll, hillock.

Tylino, to knead.

Tylwyth, a family, tribe, kindred; tylwythog, that has a great family, or
many kinsmen; tyluwr, the father, or master of a family.

Tymer, a temperate measure, due proportion; tymheru, to temper; temherus,
temperate.

Tymestl, a storm, tempest; tymhestlog, tempestuous, stormy.

Tymig, a pricking, stinging; tymhigo, to prick, to pinch.

Tymig, strong, virile, timely.

Tymor, a season, or time convenient; tymhoraidd, seasonable, meet,
decent, convenient; tymhoreiddrwydd, decency, seasonableness, fitness of
time, conveniency.

Tymp, a certain time, an appointed time, a term time; tymyr, temporality.

Tyner, tender, gentle; tynerwch, tenderness, gentleness.

Tynewyn, tenewyn, the flank.

Tynn, stretched, tight drawn, stubborn, sullen; tynder, straitness,
stubborness; tynhau, to make strait, or tight; tynn, tyniad, a draught,
pull; tynnu, to draw.

Tyno, a dale, a green plot.

Tyrfa, a multitude.

Tyrfu, to sprain, wrest a sinew.

Tyrru, to heap, gather.

Tysmwy, affliction, trembling, shivering; tysmwyo, to quake, shiver.

Tyst, a witness; tystio, tystiolaethu, to testify, bear witness.

Tytmwy, a buckle, clasp; tytmwyo, to tie, buckle, clasp.

Tywallt, to pour out.

Tywarch, _pl._ tyweirch, green turf, clod; tywarchawr, an ox, cow, neat.

Tywas, a household man-servant.

Tywod, sand; tywodlyd, sandy.

Tywydd, the weather.

Tywyll, dark, obscure; tywyllu, to darken; tywyllwg, tywyllwch, darkness.

Tywyn, tywyniad, brightness, or shining; tywynu, to shine.

Tywyn, the sea shore, sea land.

Tywyn, ray, beam of light.

Tywys, ears of corn; _sing_. tywysen.

Tywyso, to lead; tywysog, a prince; tywysogaeth, a principality.



U.


Ubain, uban, udo, to howl.

Uch, uwch, above, higher, superior; uchaf, highest, chiefest, supreme;
uchafiaeth, penaduriaeth, supremacy, height, top; uchedd, the top, or
surface; uchel, high; uchder, uchelder, height, on high; uchelfa, a high
place; uchelfaer, a sheriff, constable; uchedydd, skylark; uchelfar,
mistletoe; uchelwr, freeholder, gentleman; ucho, above.

Uchenaid, a sigh; ucheneidio, to sigh.

Ucher, the evening; ucheru, to grow late, draw towards the evening.

Ucho, uchod, above, on high.

Udcorn, a trumpet.

Udo, to howl; udfa, a howling.

Udd, a lord.

Ufel, uwel, ufeliar, a fire, spark; ufelydd, a fire-hearth.

Ufelltawd, ufylltawd, humility.

Ufudd, obedient, humble; ufudddod, obedience; ufuddhau, to obey.

Uffern, hell; uffernol, hellish.

Ugain, ugaint, twenty.

Ulw, hot embers, cinders.

Un, one; uno, to unite, appease; undeb, unity, concord; unoliaeth,
unanimity, concord of heart and mind.

Unben, unbyn, a monarch, emperor, prince; unbennes, an empress, queen,
princess; unbennaeth, monarchy.

Undras, of the same kindred.

Unddull, unffurf, uniform, alike.

Ungor, single, or untwisted.

Uniawn, right, straight; uniawni, to rectify, direct, straighten.

Unllawiog, one handed.

Unlliw, of one and the same colour.

Unllygeidiog, one eyed.

Unne, of one colour.

Unoed, of the same age.

Unon, unofu, fear.

Unwaith, once, one time.

Untrew, sneezing.

Untuog, partial.

Untyrch, entyrch, height.

Urael, asbestos; a garment made of asbestos, which could be cleansed by
fire.

Urdd, urddau, urddas, order, holy orders; urddo, to admit into orders, or
degrees; urddol, honoured with some degree or order; urddedig, that is in
honour, honourable; urddas, honour, dignity; urddasol, honourable,
worshipful; urdden, honoured with some degree, order; urdduniant, honour,
reverence.

Uriad, an elder, a senator, an old man.

Us, chaff; usyn, a chaff.

Ust, ys taw, hold thy peace, silence.

Usuriwr, an usurer; usuriaeth, usury.

Uswydd, to pieces.

Uthr, wonderful.

Uwd, a hasty-pudding, a stirabout; uwd peilliaid, pap, or meat made of
milk and wheat flower; uwd sugaethan, poultice.



W.


Wb, wbwb, ah! avaunt! fie! alas!

Wedi, after.

Weithian, weithion, now, now at length.

Weithiau, sometimes.

Wel, well, lo, behold.

Wele, behold.

Wfft, fie! bah!

Wi, heyday, well done.

Wibwrn, Coventry blue.

Wng, near, hard by.

Wihi, neighing, whinnying.

Wilameg, the web in the eye.

Wns, an ounce.

Wo, the voice of a hound a hunting.

Wrlys, a kind of herbs.

Wrth, by, hard by.

Wtra, the highway.

Wtres, luxury, prodigality; wtreswr, a prodigal man, a luxurious man.

Wy, an egg.

Wybr, wybren, the firmament, air, sky; wybrwr, wybrydd, an astronomer.

Wyf, ydwyf, I am.

Wylo, to weep; wylofain, to lament, wailing, doleful; wylofedd,
lamentation; wylofus, weeping.

Wyll, a hag, or night-mare.

Wyn, _pl. of_ oen, lambs.

Wyneb, face, countenance; wynebol, beautiful, goodly to behold; wynebu,
to behold, to face; wynebwerth, satisfaction.

Wyr, grandson, grand-daughter.

Wysg, direction, bias; wysg pen, forward.

Wyth, eight; wythfed, the eighth; wythnos, a week; wythryw, of eight
kinds.



Y.


Y, yr, the.

Ych, _pl._ ychen, an ox.

Ycha, lo, behold.

Ychenawg, needy.

Ychryn, fear, trembling, quivering.

Ychwaith, chwaith, neither.

Ychwerig, a little.

Ychwinsa, now, immediately.

Ychydig, a little; ychydigyn, a mote, particle.

Yd, corn; yden, a grain of corn; ydlan, a yard made for ricks of corn, or
hay; ŷd-tir, corn-land.

Yd, ydd, y, yr, the.

Yfed, to drink, a drinking; yfwr, a drinker; yfetri, to tipple.

Yfory, to-morrow.

Ygys, frowning.

Yngan, yngenyd, to speak, to mention.

Ynglef, ynglais, a great cry, or noise, shriek.

Yngo, yngod, close, hard by.

Yngres, between.

Yngwrth, yngyrth, suddenly, presently.

Yleni, eleni, this present year.

Ylltyr, a mole, or wart.

Ym-, a particle expressing reflexion or mutuality.

Ym, myn, an adverb of swearing by.

Yma, yman, here.

Ymachludd, ymachlud, machlud, to hide, hidden.

Ymadael, to depart.

Ymadferth, activity, defence.

Ymadolwyn, to beseech, entreat.

Ymadrodd, a speech; ymadroddi, to make a speech; ymadroddus, well spoken,
eloquent.

Ymaes, without, out of doors.

Ymafael, to lay hold, to wrestle; ymaelydd, a wrestler.

Ymaith, away, hence, out of the way.

Ymannerch, congratulation.

Ymannos, the other night, last night.

Ymannos, ymannog, to exhort one another mutually.

Ymarddelw, to claim.

Ymarwar, discord.

Ymbil, to implore, to beseech.

Ymborth, food, nourishment; ymborthi, to feed one’s self.

Ymchwelyd, to turn away, to turn aside.

Ymdaeru, to stand in controversy.

Ymdaith, to travel.

Ymdiro, to bask.

Ymdrafodi, to fall out, to strive.

Ymdraffullio, to hasten.

Ymdrech, endeavour.

Ymdrin, defiance, variance.

Ymdroi, to turn, loiter.

Ymdwymno, to warm one’s self.

Ymdynnu, to strive.

Ymdywynygu, to shine.

Ymddangos, to appear.

Ymddifad, orphan; ymddifadu, to deprive, to bereave one of a thing.

Ymddifregu â Duw, to beseech God.

Ymddifustlo, to scold.

Ymddiffyn, to defend, a defence; ymddiffynfa, a defence, safe-guard.

Ymddihafarchu, to strive, or contend.

Ymddihatru, to undress.

Ymddiodi, to guzzle.

Ymddioli, to blot out one’s tracks.

Ymddirgelu, to hide one’s self.

Ymddiried, to trust, confide in.

Ymddiwad, to deny, refuse, report.

Ymddrychioli, to appear.

Ymddwyn, to behave.

Ymddŵyn, to conceive.

Ymddyfalu, to guess to one’s self.

Ymddyfoli, to devour.

Ymegnio, to endeavour.

Ymeirio, ymremial, to bicker.

Ymennydd, the brain.

Ymenyn, butter.

Ymestyn, to stretch one’s self.

Ymfyddino, to encamp.

Ymffrost, a boasting; ymffrostio, to boast.

Ymgael, to be well met, or well matched.

Ymgais, attempt, effort.

Ymgatewrach, to fight, skirmish.

Ymgeinio, to scold, curse; ymgeiniaith, the language of quarrels;
ymgeintach, to quarrel.

Ymgeledd, succour, care; ymgeleddu, to cherish, to take care of, or look
after; ymgeleddwr, an overseer, tutor, a guardian.

Ymgreinio, to roll, or tumble one’s self upon the ground.

Ymgroesi, to mark with the sign of the cross, to bless one’s self.

Ymgydgam, company, dalliance.

Ymgyfhogi, to fence, fight.

Ymgyfredeg, a meeting.

Ymgyfarfod, a meeting, to meet together.

Ymgyhydu, to join or twist together.

Ymgyllellu, to fight.

Ymgymeryd, undertake.

Ymgynnal, to help, or support one another, continence, chastity,
forbearance from lust or pleasure.

Ymgyrch, a coming together, assault; ymgyrchu, to come together, make an
assault.

Ymgywreinio, to adjust one’s self.

Ymherodraeth, an empire.

Ymhonni, to assert, vindicate.

Ymhwrdd, a butting, or pushing.

Ymladd, to fight, a fighting; ymladdgar, quarrelsome.

Ymlâdd, to kill one’s self, to tire one’s self.

Ymlaen, before, forward.

Ymlaesu, to fail, to decay.

Ymleflef, to bicker, scold.

Ymliw, to reproach, expostulate.

Ymlochlach, to flatter.

Ymlyferydd, to rave, dotage.

Ymlyniad, a persecutor, pursuer.

Ymiachau, to heal one another, to take their farewell.

Ymnoddi, to take refuge.

Ymobryn, to bargain.

Ymod, to move, remove; diymod, immovable.

Ymofeg, idea, impulse.

Ymodwrdd, to make a tumult.

Ymogelyd, to beware.

Ymogor, habitation.

Ymoleithio, to flatter.

Ymorchestu, to wrestle, strive.

Ymorchuddio, to hide one’s self.

Ymornest, to fight a duel.

Ymorol, to enquire.

Ymorugo, to be fierce.

Ymorwst, to wrestle, strive.

Ymrain, ymread, ymrewydd, copulation.

Ymraint, at the point of.

Ymrwyllo, to extricate one’s self.

Ymryson, strife; ymrysongar, contentious.

Ymsang, a pressing, straining.

Ymserthu, to scold, abuse.

Ymsorllach, to flatter.

Ymswrn, a pressing, squeezing.

Ymswyno, to bless one’s self with the sign of the cross.

Ymsywyn, to scold, to cavil.

Ymwadu, to deny, renounce; ymwad, a denial.

Ymwan, to strive, to wrestle.

Ymwared, deliverance.

Ymwasgu, to embrace, to hug.

Ymweddu, to agree, accord.

Ymwngc, near, a neighbour.

Ymwneuthur, to conspire together.

Ymwr, violence, assault; ymwrio, to strive, to fight.

Ymwrando, to harken.

Ymwrdd, ymhwrdd, to strive, contend, thrust, or push against.

Ymwybod, to acknowledge, consider.

Ymwylio, to watch, tend.

Ymynhedd, to implore, intreat.

Ymyrryd, to interfere, meddle.

Ymysgar, ymysgaroedd, the entrails, or guts.

Ymysgrain, ymosgrain, ymosgryn, ymgreinio, to tumble upon the ground.

Ymystwyro, to stretch one’s self.

Yn, in, till.

Yn awr, yr awron, yrwan, now, at this present.

Yna, then.

Ynad, barnwr, a judge.

Ynfyd, foolish, mad, simple; ynfydrwydd, folly, madness; ynfydu, to grow
foolish, or mad.

Ynial, wonderful, forsaken.

Ynni, courage, strength, valour.

Ynnill, gain, profit, to gain.

Yno, there, then.

Ynt, are.

Ynteu, yntef, he himself.

Ynteu, ynte, else, then.

Ynwst, moist, wet.

Ynyd, Shrovetide.

Ynys, an island.

Yr, the, that.

Yressu, to welcome.

Ys, is, truly; ys ef, to wit, that is; ys id, is it? is there?

Ysb, guests.

Ysbaid, a space, while.

Ysbar, a lance, spear.

Ysbleddach, recreation, pastime.

Ysbonc, a jostle, jerk, spurt.

Ysborthion, fodder.

Ysbrigyn, a sprig, twig.

Ysbrychu, to freckle, to break out into pimples, soil, or besmear, to
become mildewed.

Ysbryd, spirit.

Ysbwrial, sweepings, refuse.

Ysbwng, a sponge.

Ysbydwr, an host.

Ysbyddad, ysbyddawd, hospitality.

Ysbys, sure, certain, positive.

Yscenn, the dandruff of the head.

Ysgablar, a scarf.

Ysgafael, ysgafeth, ysgafell, ysglyfaeth, a prey.

Ysgafala, ysgyfala, careless, negligent, safe; ysgafalhawch,
carelessness, leisure, vacancy.

Ysgafell, edge, rim, brow.

Ysgafn, ysgawn, light, easy; ysgafnhau, to ease, to lighten; ysgafn o ŷd
neu wair, a heap of corn or hay; ysgafnu, to heap or set up corn, hay;
ysgafnder, lightness.

Ysgai, foam, froth, scum.

Ysgain, a sprinkling; ysgeinio, to sprinkle.

Ysgal, a cup, basin.

Ysgall, thistles.

Ysgar, separated, divorced; part, portion; ysgar, ysgariaeth, llythyr
ysgar, divorce; ysgardde, a dispersion, scattering; ysgarant, adversary.

Ysgarlad, scarlet.

Ysgarm, a clamorous noise, an outcry; ysgarmes, a skirmish.

Ysgatfydd, it may be, perhaps.

Ysgaw, elder trees.

Ysgeler, wicked, villainous, ungracious, mischievous.

Ysgemydd, a bench.

Ysgerbwd, a carrion, dry carcase.

Ysgewyll, young sprigs.

Ysgidogyll, a siskin.

Ysgien, a knife, sword.

Ysgîn, a long gown, pelisse; ysginawr, a tailor; ysginyddiaeth,
tailoring.

Ysginydd-dŷ, a tanhouse.

Ysglawring, glue.

Ysglem, a blot, stain, slice.

Ysglen, kind, sex.

Ysglent, a rebounding; ysglentio, to rebound.

Ysglinen, knot, knob.

Ysglodion, chips; ysglydioni, to chip; ysglodyn, a chip.

Ysglyf, a prey, spoil; ysglyfio, to spoil, to make a prey; ysglyfaeth,
ysbail, spoil, rapine.

Ysglywyn, to defend.

Ysgobell, a saddle.

Ysgod, a shadow, a hag; ysgodigaw, to be frightened, to wince and kick as
a frightened horse.

Ysgoewan, light, inconstant.

Ysgog, stir, motion.

Ysgoi, to lean, or yield unto, to go aside.

Ysgol, ysgoldy, a school, school-house; ysgolhaig, a scholar;
ysgolheigtod, scholarship, learning.

Ysgol ddringo, a ladder.

Ysgolp, a lath to fasten thatch.

Ysgor, ysgorfa, fortification.

Ysgorddion, strangers.

Ysgoren, ysgorawg, a boat made of twigs and horse-hide.

Ysgorn, scorn, contumely.

Ysgort, a noise, report of a gun.

Ysgothi, to go to stool; ysgothfa, a house of office.

Ysgrafell, a curry-comb.

Ysgraff, a ferry-boat.

Ysgraffinio, to scratch, to lance a sore.

Ysgrawen, a crust, rind, or skin.

Ysgrawling, glue; ysgrawlingo, to glue.

Ysgre, a horse.

Ysgrech, shriek; ysgrech y coed, jay.

Ysgrepan, a satchel, wallet.

Ysgri, a great cry, or noise.

Ysgrifen, a writing; ysgrifennu, to write.

Ysgrîn, a screen.

Ysgrogell, a drawbridge.

Ysgrubl, a labouring, or working beast.

Ysgrwd, a carcase.

Ysgryd, a trembling, quivering; ysgrydu, to shake, tremble; ysgrynedig,
trembling.

Ysgrythur, Scripture; Ysgrythur Lân, the Holy Scripture.

Ysgub, a broom, besom; ysgub o yd, a sheaf of corn; ysgubell, a sheaf of
corn, broom, besom; ysgubo, to sweep; ysgubion, sweepings.

Ysgubor, a barn.

Ysgutyll, a kite.

Ysguthan, a ring-dove.

Ysgwar, square.

Ysgŵd, a push.

Ysgwfl, a prey, spoil.

Ysgwier, an esquire.

Ysgwir, os gwir, if true.

Ysgwl, excrescence, scab.

Ysgwn, esgwn, strength.

Ysgwr, violence, an assault, force.

Ysgwrlwgach, to rattle, clatter, clash.

Ysgwthr, an engraving, carving, lopping; ysgythru, to lop.

Ysgwyd, ysgydwyd, to shake.

Ysgwydd, a shield, buckler; a shoulder; ysgwyddo, to jostle or rush with
the shoulder; ysgwyddog, broad shouldered.

Ysgydio, ysgytio, to shake violently.

Ysgyfaint, the lungs.

Ysgyfala = ysgafala, careless.

Ysgyfar, ysgyfarn, an ear; ysgyfarllynig, having speckled ears.

Ysgyfarnog, a hare.

Ysgyfeinwst, grief, sorrow, affliction, sickness.

Ysgyflu, to take, snatch away, devour; ysgyflgar, greedy, ravenous.

Ysgymun, excommunication, accursed, quarrelsome, morose; ysgymundod, an
excommunication, a cursing, frowardness, peevishness; ysgymuno, to
excommunicate, curse, provoke unto anger and fury.

Ysgymodi, to reconcile.

Ysgyren, a shingle, plank, board, splinter; ysgyrioni, to cleave into
shingles, or splinters.

Ysgyryd, rough, cruel.

Ysgythru, to lop, or cut the branches; ysgythyr, a tusk.

Ysid, there is, it may be.

Ysig, bruised, shattered.

Yslepan, trap, snare, gin, pitfall.

Yslipanu, to burnish, polish.

Yslotian, to dabble, tipple.

Ysmachd, an ill deed, an ill turn.

Ysmala, waggish, careless, inconstant; ysmalhawch, levity, lightness,
inconstancy, carelessness; ysmalhau, to wax careless.

Ysmwcan, a cloud, smoke, fog.

Ysnid, a snipe, or little woodcock.

Ysnoden, a hair-lace, any lace, or ribband; ysnodennog, laced.

Yspaddaden, hawthorn.

Yspagau, the spokes of a wheel, the claws of a bird.

Yspaid, a pause, space.

Yspail, a spoil, a prey; yspeilio, to spoil, to make a prey.

Yspardun, a spur; ysparduno, to spur.

Yspawr, _pl._ ysporion, fodder.

Yspeinio, to enclose, to shell.

Yspelwi, to gall, to chafe.

Yspêr, lance, spear.

Yspio, to observe, espy; yspienddyn, yspiennwr, yspiwr, a spy; yspios,
ysbiwyr, spies, scouts.

Ysplennydd, bright, glittering.

Yspodol, a two-handed sword, a spatula that surgeons spread their
plasters with; yspodoli, to beat with a staff or cudgel.

Ysponc, a jerk, skip.

Yspred, refuse, outcasts.

Yspryd, a spirit; ysprydol, spiritual; ysprydoliaeth, inspiration.

Yspur, a short post, of pillar to set things upon; yspurlath, a rafter, a
prop.

Yspwrn, yspwng, a sponge.

Yspwys, weight, weighty.

Ystad, a state, condition, constitution.

Ystaen, a stain; ystaenio, to stain.

Ystafell, room, chamber.

Ystagiad, a strangling, or choking; ystagu, to choke or strangle.

Ystang, a perch, long rod, pole.

Ystal, stall, stock, rick.

Ystalwyn, stallion.

Ystel, to stretch, extend.

Ystels, a fox’s skin.

Ysten, a pitcher.

Ystid, ystidwm, a chain.

Ystiferion, the dropping of the eaves of a house.

Ystifflog, a cuttlefish.

Ystig, diligent, industrious.

Ystil, pen, style, method.

Ystinos = urael, asbestos.

Ystle, kindred, affinity.

Ystlen, sex, kind.

Ystlomi, to have thin stools.

Ystlum, a bat.

Ystlys, a side; ystlysu, to go aside, to make a side.

Ystod, a swath.

Ystof, the warp of a cloth; ystofi, dylifo, to warp cloth, &c.

Ystofi, dofi, to tame.

Ystol, a stool, or seat.

Ystola, stole, gown.

Ystôr, a store, treasure; ystordy, a store-house.

Ystor, rosin.

Ystori, history; ystoriawr, historian.

Ystorm, a tempest, storm.

Ystrad, a vale.

Ystranc, a stratagem, strategy.

Ystref, a habitation, dwelling.

Ystrewi, to sneeze.

Ystrin, a battle, fight, contention.

Ystrodur, a pack-saddle, horse cart saddle.

Ystryd, a street, highway.

Ystryw, industry, discretion, skill, wit; ystrywgar, crafty, full of
tricks, or inventions; ystrywiaw, to think of, or devise some tricks.

Ystudfach, a stilt.

Ystum, figure, shape, form; ystumio, to bend, shape, frame or form;
ystumgar, well-shaped.

Ystuno, to vex, trouble, or move, to drive away, beat away.

Ysturmant, Jews’ harp.

Ystwc, a bucket, pail.

Ystŵr, stir, noise, tumult.

Ystwffwl, the clapper of a door.

Ystwyth, limber, pliable; ystwythder, pliableness; ystwytho, to make
limber, or pliable, to wax limber.

Ystyfnig, stubborn, dogged.

Ystyffylog, a great chest, with a round lid like a trunk.

Ystyllen, a board, plank.

Ystyn, to reach, or lengthen.

Ystywanu, to vex, trouble.

Ystyr, consideration; ystyrio, ystyried, to consider.

Ysu, to devour.

Yswain, a knight.

Yswidw, yswigw = sywidw, tit.

Yswil, bashful; yswilio, to be confused, blush.

Ysywaeth, forsooth.

Ytoedd, ydoedd, was.

Ytyw, ydyw, is.

Yw, ydyw, is.

Ywen, _pl._ yw, a yew-tree.



