







[Transcriber's Note: Bold text is surrounded by =equal signs= and italic
text is surrounded by _underscores_.]



Taking the Census

A Farce

    By
    ELIZABETH F. GUPTILL


    _Price 10 Cents_


    _All Rights Reserved, Amateur Performance Permitted_

[Illustration: _Tullar-Meredith Co._]

  265 West 36th Street, New York       14 W. Washington Street, Chicago

  _Copyright 1914 by Tullar-Meredith Co._

  _International Copyright Secured_




Taking the Census




Characters


Mr. Cole, the Census Taker. Mrs. Almira Johnson, a “Cullud Lady.”

Alexander Johnson, her Young Son.




SCENE

Mrs. Johnson’s home. Mrs. Johnson winding yarn which Alexander holds
for her.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. J. Now yo’ jes’ stop yo’ wigglin’, Alexandah, caze yo’ got to hole
dis yahn till yo’ mammy git it all winded up in a big ball fo’ to knit
yo’ wintah stockin’s wiv. Keep it straight, now. No, don’t straitch is
so! Jes’ hole it easy.

ALEX. But mah ahms is tiahd, Mammy, an’ mah han’s ache.

MRS. J. Dat don’ make a bit o’ diffunce. Yo’ hole dat ar yahn good.
Does yo’ heah?

ALEX. Caint I hole it bimeby, an’ res’ a while now, Mammy?

MAMMY. No, yo’ caint! Yo’ jes’ want to git out an’ play baseball wiv
dem no-count white chilluns. I don’ want yo’ should ’sociate wiv sech
trash. Sit up, does yo’ heah?

ALEX. Yaas, but——

MRS. J. (Getting a switch from the corner.) Alexandah Xerxes Napoleon
Washin’ton Johnsing, does yo’ see dat switch?

ALEX. I’m a-holdin’ it, Mammy. I’m a-holdin’ it good.

MAMMY. Yo’ jes keep on a-holdin’ it good, an’ don’ yo’ fuss no moah. (A
loud rap is heard.) Mah goodness, who dat? (She walks to door, still
winding yarn, and opens it.)

MR. C. Good afternoon, Madam.

MRS. J. Good aftahnoon, sah. Will yo’ walk in?

MR. C. Thank you, I will. I have here the census report blanks and I am
taking the census.

MRS. J. We-all hasn’t no moah senses dan we needs, ouah selves, sah,
an’ we don’ p’etend dat we has.

MR. C. I mean I am taking the vital statistics, Madam.

MRS. J. Vital stickses! Yo’ caint steal no wood here, an’ yo’ caint
puffo’m no suhgicla-opahrations, needah. My vitals is inside o’ me,
an’ dare dey am a-gwine to merain. Does yo’ heah? We-all don’ need no
suhgeons, ’tall. No, yo’ needn’t stayah at dat boy. Yo’ caint speriment
wiv his insides.

MR. C. But I am not a surgeon, Madam. I am the census man.

MRS. J. Yo’ suttinly am a senseless man, but don’ try any capers
heah, fo’ mah eyes is on yo’, an’ de carbin’ knife am mighty handy.
Alexandah, yo’ drap dat yahn, and go find a p’licemans. Tell him we-all
has got a luniac heah. Hump yo’se’f, now, whilst I watch him. (Exit
Alex.)

MR. C. (Calling.) Come back here, boy. It’s all right.

MRS. J. (Calling.) Go ’long dare, yo’ heah me? (To Mr. C.) Now yo’ sit
down an’ keep still, an’ dar shan’t nuffin huht yo’. But don’ yo’ come
a ’step nighah.

MR. C. I assure you, Madam, you are mistaken. I only want to ask a few
questions, and write down your answers.

MRS. J. Dat’s all right. Might as well ’muse yo’se’f dat way as any
odah. What yo’ tink yo’ wan’ to know?

MR. C. (Opening book.) What is your husband’s name?

MRS. J. Gawge Washin’ton Pompey Caesar Johnsing.

MR. C. Born?

MRS. J. Co’se he war bohn! Yo’ don’ t’ink he growed on a melon vine,
does yer?

MR. C. I mean, where and when was he born?

MRS. J. In his daddy’s cabin, in watermillion time.

MR. C. Where was his daddy’s cabin?

MRS. J. In de quahtahs, on ole Massa Johnsing’s place, down in Souf
Ca’liny.

MR. C. Before the war?

MRS. J. Shuah. De yeah dey took Fort Sumter. I disremembah de numbah.

MR. C. ’61. What is his occupation?

MRS. J. Why I isn’t quite shuah, not to be sartin, sah. I t’ink he’s a
bandmastah, but he may be jus’ a coalheavah.

MR. C. But they are not at all alike. Where does he work?

MRS. J. Dat’s jes’ it, sah. Ef I knowed dat, I’d know what he done be
doin’.

MR. C. But doesn’t he ever say?

MRS. J. He nebah has, sah, not one bressed wohd, dough I’m a savin’ up
to go to a mid-dle-um some day, and den I know.

MR. C. A middle-um?

MRS. J. Jes’ so. One ob dese yer hoodoo womans what conjer an call up
de ha’nts to speak to dare folkses.

MR. C. Oh, a medium! Then your husband is dead?

MRS. J. He am dat.

MR. C. How long?

MRS. J. ’Bout fibe foot eight, sah.

MR. C. I mean, how long has he been dead?

MRS. J. Las’ wintah, sah, jes’ arter Chris’mus.

(Enter Alexander, alone. He has been running.)

ALEX. De p’licemans say dat it all right, Mammy. De gubmint sent him,
an’ yo’ mus’ answer what he ax yo’ to.

MRS. J. He’s drefful ’quis’tive, but if de Pres’dint send him, we-all
mus’ put up wiv him, I spec’.

MR. C. What is your name?

MRS. J. Missus Johnsing, ob co’se.

MR. C. What was your maiden name? (She looks puzzled.) I mean, before
you were married.

MRS. J. Oh, I war Miss Birdie Apple-Blossom. I war de bell ob de ball
when I war a gal.

MR. C. And where were you born?

MRS. J. In de no’f, sah, in Philadelphy, de yeah Mars Aberaham Lincum
made de darkies free. Dat nex’ summah, sah.

MR. C. What is your occupation?

MRS. J. Ise a laundry lady, sah——a do-uppah. I does up de ladies’ fine
t’ings——laces, and lingry and sech.

MR. C. How many children?

MRS. J. ’Leben, sah. Dars Gawge Washin’ton Pompey Caesah, named fo’ his
daddy——he’s daid; an’ dars Celia Agnes Rosabelle, she am mah’ied, an’
libes in Virginny. Den dar am Thucydides Plato an’ Aristides Pluto,
de twins. Dey wo’k in a bah-bah shop in Newark, an’ Thomas Jefferson
Jackson, he am a bell boy in a hotel in Washin’ton, an’ Lily Pearl
Beryl, she am a lady’s maid, an’ trabels obah lan’ an’ sea in an ottah
mower beely—one ob dem ar debble wagons, yo’ know. Less see, dat am how
many?

MR. C. Six.

MRS. J. Nex’ am de triplets, Pollyanna, Susieanna and Roxieanna, dey am
at school jes’ now, an’ Birdena Philopena Maud, she am at school, too,
an’ dis yere pickaninny Alexandah Xerxes Napoleon Washin’ton, who am
at hum, caze he been a habin’ de measles, an’ I don’ wan’ him to study
ontwell Ise shuah his eyes are strong ’nuff. Teachahs am drefful hahd
on chillun’s eyes. Now don’ yo’ go a-axin’ how old all dem chillunses
is, caze I dunno.

MR. C. Have you any property?

MRS. J. Is yo’ all a tax-c’lectah?

MR. C. No.

MRS. J. Den it’s none ob yo’ bus’ness, an’ Ise tiah’d ob ans’in’ yo’
foolish questions so yo’ c’n jes’ take yo’ foot in yo’ han’ and go
’long.

MR. C. But my dear—

MRS. J. Don’ yo’ try to flirt wid me, you pasty-faced white man.

MR. C. I have no such intentions, but—

MRS. J. Den yo’ was in earnest when yo’ called me yo’ deah? Yo’
a-huntin’ fo’ a wife?

MR. C. No indeed, madam.

MRS. J. Yo’ mahied?

MR. C. No, but—

MRS. J. Den it all right, deah. I axcep’ yo’! Yo’ is shuah a fine
lookin’ man, an’ Ise proud to be yo’ wife.

MR. C. But my dear madam—

MRS. J. Dat’s so, Ise yo’ deah, an’ yo’s mah honey. Let me hug yo’ once.

MR. C. (Rising precipitately.) I must be going.

MRS. J. Don’ yo’ hurry, honey boy. I wants ter ax yo’ some questions
now. I’ll sit in yo’ lap while I does it.

MR. C. (Going hastily out.) Excuse me, I see some one I must speak to.

MRS. J. (Laughing heartily.) Ha, ha, ha! Did yo’ see me get rid ob dat
fella wid his fool questions, Alexandah? Ho, ho, ho! As if I’d take a
washed out white man in yo’ deah daddy’s shoes. Ho, ho, ho! He t’ought
I was a-gwine ter kiss him! Run give him his book, sonny; he clean
furgot it. Ho, ho, ho! Dat’s de way to get rid ob de Senses mans! He
done made tracks libely when he t’ought I want him. Dat’s de besses
joke dis yeah. I mus’ go tell Ca’liny Jackson, fo’ he gets to her house
a-axin’ questions an’ peekin’ into her pribate ’fairs. Ho, ho, ho! But
dat war a good one on de Senses man! (Goes out, laughing.)




Best Entertainments for Any Time.


Dialogs and Plays.

=A CORNER IN HEARTS.= By Edna Randolph Worrell. Parlor play for 4 young
men and 1 lady, or 5 men. Very amusing. All the lovers propose to the
same girl. Rich humor; pleasing situations. Excellent for any time. 25
minutes. 15 cents.

[Illustration]

=A DAY AT HAPPY HOLLOW SCHOOL.= By Lettie Cook VanDerveer. A new play
of the “Deestrick Skule” type. Up-to-date wit and clever drolleries. A
city automobile party in contrast with rural youngsters. Lots of fun.
Songs, etc., may be introduced. A capital play to make money for church
or school. 25 cents.

=A GOOSE AND SOME GEESE.= By Eleanor Stinchcomb. A Jolly Mother Goose
play with a very pointed climax. For 5 girls and 7 boys. Time, 15
minutes. 15 cents.

=A HALLOWE’EN ADVENTURE.= A lively play, by Effie Louise Koogle. Full
of ghostly excitement and spooky frolic. Specially suited for social
occasions. 8 males and 8 females, or more. 3 scenes. 1 hour. 15 cents.

[Illustration]

=A LITTLE HEROINE OF THE REVOLUTION.= A play for all ages. By Elizabeth
F. Guptill. A little girl is sent ostensibly to play with a friend,
but really to carry a message to General Marion. She is captured by
the British, but by her cleverness deceives them, and reaches her
destination. Full of historic interest. 10 males, 5 females. More boys
may be added as soldiers, if desired. 25 cents.

=AL MARTIN’S COUNTRY STORE.= A burlesque for from 15 to 30
participants, by Archibald Humboldt and Martelle Everett. Unsurpassed
for merriment, taking qualities and ease of production. A country
store with all its peculiar environments is depicted. The loafers, the
small customers, the gossipers, the lovers, the innocent fun makers,
all have parts. There is a graceful plot that gathers interest as the
play proceeds and culminates in a brilliant climax. Unquestionably the
greatest success as a popular entertainment. 25 cents.

[Illustration]

=CONTEST OF THE NATIONS, THE.= A spectacular play or cantata, by
Elizabeth F. Guptill. The Goddess of Liberty and 12 nations compete for
the laurel crown. It embraces a fine march; splendid songs by Archibald
Humboldt. Very effective. 13 ladies. 25 cents.

=CABBAGE HILL SCHOOL.= A humorous play for children or young people,
by Elizabeth F. Guptill. Presents the trials of a new “skewl-marm” on
the opening day, and the performances of the pupils in the presence of
august visitors on closing day. A veritable mirth-provoker. Full of the
richest humor. 10 males, 16 female characters (or less). 25c.

=CROWNING THE MAY QUEEN.= A spectacular play by Elizabeth F. Guptill.
Children go Maying, select and crown a queen, wind the Maypole, and
have a merry time. The frolic is quickly changed to great excitement by
the appearance of a gypsy, who attempts to abduct them. A very clever
plot and a happy arrangement. 9 boys and 8 girls, or 17 girls. 25 cents.

=CUPID’S JOKE.= A charming little drama in which Cupid plays an
important part. A splendid society play for St. Valentine’s Day, or any
social occasion. 5 male and 5 female characters, and Cupid. 3 scenes.
45 minutes. By Effie Louise Koogle. 15 cents.

=DIALOGS FOR ANY TIME, ORIGINAL.= By Elizabeth F. Guptill. Interesting
and amusing. May be given in any room with very few property
requirements, by primary and intermediate grades. The author’s name is
a guarantee of their excellence. They are witty, spicy and lively. 25
cents.

=DISPELLING OF BIG JIM, THE.= A negro farce in one act, by Sterling C.
Brewer. Decidedly humorous. Big Jim is being tried by the officials
of Big Bethel Church for some misdemeanor. The trial is full of
interesting occurrences and culminates in an exciting event. Full of
darky humor. 8 male characters. 30 minutes. 15 cents.

=DOCTOR AND PATIENT.= By John M. Drake. 2 male characters. Very funny.
5c.

=DOIG’S EXCELLENT DIALOGS.= By Agnes M. Doig. Contains four excellent
dialogs for the primary grades. “Keeping Store,” 3 girls, 1 boy.
“Guessing,” 3 girls, 2 boys. “Playing School,” 4 boys, 4 girls.
“Christmas Eve,” 3 girls, 2 boys. 10 cents.

=DOLL DIALOG.= This is a very instructive dialog for 4 little girls. 5
cents.

=DOLLY SHOW, THE.= A dialog in rhyme for 7 little girls and 2 boys. The
girls have a baby show with their dollies, and each “mother” shows her
baby off to the best advantage. The judge is unusually wise, awarding
the prize to the satisfaction of each one. The sayings of the little
ones are cute, and the whole performance a great success. 15 cents.

=DOLLS’ SYMPOSIUM, THE.= A most unique and captivating play, by
Elizabeth F. Guptill. It combines spicy dialog, fascinating drills,
clever burlesque, entrancing songs and cunning antics. Children
impersonate the dolls and do the most amusing stunts. Unequaled as a
surprising fun maker. For any number from 16 to 50. One-half to one and
one-half hours, as desired. 25 cents.

=GOING TO MEET AUNT HATTIE.= A dialog by Mrs. Hunt. For 1 male and 3
female characters. 5 cents.

=THE GOLDEN GOBLET.= An exceedingly clever farce, with female cast, for
Bachelor Girls’ and Women’s Clubs, Sororities, etc., by Louise Rand
Bascom, author of “The Masonic Ring.” Uproariously funny with absurd
situations and comical elaborations. A “hit” for any occasion. Easy to
produce. Any number of characters, but 12 required. 1 hr. 35c.

[Illustration]

=HEIR OF MT. VERNON, THE.= A Colonial Society Play for any occasion, in
which Washington’s social life, sterling manhood and courteous manners
are portrayed. In one scene Christmas is celebrated in rare plantation
style. Lively with old plantation melodies and pranks. By Effie Louise
Koogle. For grammar grades or adults. 4 scenes, 8 boys and 8 girls, or
more will be better. 1 to 2 hours. 25 cents.

  =No entertainments sent on approval or exchanged.=




THE LATEST ENTERTAINMENTS—JUST PUBLISHED


=KRIS KRINGLE’S MINSTRELS.=

By Effie Louise Koogle. The “totally different” Christmas
entertainment. Add to the attractiveness of the minstrel show idea the
distinction of having “His Royal Nibs” as Interlocutor, with equally
unique personalities as End Men, endow them with a program flashing
with fun, brilliant with beauty, enlivening with song and teeming with
specialties, and you have a scream of delight from start to finish. The
most novel novelty of the age. =25 cents.=

=THE CRIMSON AND THE BLUE.=

By Edith Palmer Painton. A class play in four acts and an epilog. 6
males, 6 females. We have prevailed upon the author to allow us to
publish this remarkably successful commencement play, which has been
leased in manuscript for several years, and which always scores a
brilliant success. It is the highest type commencement play. Acting
rights free to purchaser of 12 copies. =35 cents.=

=VERA’S VACATION.=

By Louise Rand Bascom. 4 males, 5 females. This accomplished author
has done nothing better than this absorbing story of a summer vacation
and the marvelous transformation of a grouchy father into a genial
friend. The summer boarders are every one eccentric characters and
the opportunities are immense. Clean, wholesome, elegant. Strongly
recommended. =25c.=

=THE CHARITY PUPIL.=

By Misses Rice and Clark. 14 females. A boarding school episode lively
with vivacious pranks and interesting situations. The plot is strong,
and culminates in a happy surprise. Stunts and specialties introduced.
A splendid class play. =25 cents.=

=PETITE PLAYS.=

A capital collection of the spiciest comic dialogs, comedies and
farces by the best known writers in America. These plays are short,
strong, pithy and witty, easy to give, and require only from two to six
characters. Just right for schools. =30 cents.=

=HUMOR UP-TO-DATE.=

The cleverest humor of modern times. Monologs, readings and
recitations, portraying the funny side of present-day notions and
doings. Fresh, crisp, snappy. For all ages. =25 cents.=


The Famous Five-Cent Funny Farces.

    =AUNT JERUSHA AND UNCLE JOSH.= By Effie Louise Koogle.
    1 male, 2 females. These eccentric folk visit the
    school, producing no end of fun. =5 cents.=

    =AUNT LUCINDY STAYS.= By Willis N. Bugbee. 2 males, 2
    females. Two darky characters make lots of fun. Clever
    and clean. =5 cents.=

    =“BEAT IT!”= By Willis N. Bugbee. 3 males, 1 female. A
    scolding wife makes trouble for everybody, the parson
    included. Oceans of fun. =5 cents.=

    =THE BUGTOWN BAND.= By Archibald Humboldt. 4 males, 1
    female. More fun than you can imagine, and a little
    music which anybody can make. =5 cents.=

    =THE BUZZVILLE NEWS.= By Effie Louise Koogle. 2 males,
    1 female. A breezy conversation between the manager and
    new editor. A sure hit. =5 cents.=

    =BETTY AND BETSY.= By Willis N. Bugbee. 2 males, 2
    females. Betsy was advertised for sale, but he wanted
    Betty. Bright and pretty. =5 cents.=

    =DOT ENTERTAINS.= By Elizabeth F. Guptill. 1 male, 1
    female. Dot entertains her big sister’s beau, and the
    things she tells him are a plenty. A big success. =5
    cents.=

    =THE GOOSE FEATHER BED.= By Willis N. Bugbee. 4 males,
    1 female. A dandy little play for Irish and eccentric
    characters. Easy and amusing. =5 cents.=

    =THE LUNATIC OR THE PROFESSOR.= By Louise Rand Bascom.
    2 males, 2 females. The lunatic is mistaken for the
    brain specialist, which is hard on the lunatic. Great.
    =5c.=

    =LOOK OUT FOR HEZIKIAH.= By Louise Rand Bascom. 3
    males, 1 female. Hayseed parents visit college dean.
    Splendid opportunity for clever acting. Bright and
    amusing. =5c.=

    =LAUGHTER AND SONG.= By Archibald Humboldt. 3 males, 4
    females. Comic dialog interspersed with jolly songs,
    making a continuous funny story. =5 cents.=

    =MORE TIME OUT.= By Carolyn F. Rice. 7 females. An
    amusing comedy dealing with the servant problem.
    The characters are strongly contrasted. Easy, but
    effective. =5 cents.=

    =OH, YOU TEACHER!= By C. A. Donaldson. 8 males, 4
    females. A splendid comedy of school life, showing the
    amateur teacher’s trials. Funny and well suited for
    schools. =5c.=

    =ONE ON THE AGENT.= By Louise Rand Bascom. 1 male, 1
    female. A clever skit, bright with telling repartee.
    Recommended for all occasions. =5 cents.=

    =THE “PHYSICAL TORTURE” CLUB.= By Willis N. Bugbee.
    2 m. 2 f. Physical culture exercises for which Ma is
    too stout and Pa is too rheumatic. Killingly funny. =5
    cents.=

    =RASTUS BLINK’S MINSTRELS.= By Effie Louise Koogle. For
    any number. His “Kinky Koons” are killing. The jolliest
    minstrel show ever. A deluge of drollery. =5 cents.=

    =THE SQUASHVILLE FIRE BRIGADE.= By Willis N. Bugbee.
    3 males, 2 females, and other firemen, if desired. A
    brisk and snappy little dialog. Easy and clever. =5
    cents.=

    =“SCAT!”= By Louise Rand Bascom. 1 male, 1 female.
    Cunning attempt of an old maid to prove her youth. Very
    laughable. =5 cents.=

    =SEEING THE ANIMALS. By Clara J. Denton. 1 male, 2
    females. A swell hotel clerk, a suffragette, and a
    spoiled child make a lively time. A hit. =5 cents.=

    =THE STUPID WITNESS. 3 males. The lawyer and witness
    lock horns and have an awful time, but it’s fun for the
    audience. Swift and keen. =5 cents.=

    =THE TRAIN LEAVES IN TEN MINUTES. By Louise Rand
    Bascom. 1 male, 2 females. Will they catch the train?
    The awful suspense is punctured by fun and wit. =5
    cents.=

    =WANTED: A LICENSE TO WED. By Elizabeth F. Guptill. 2
    males, 1 female. Humorous situation resulting from a
    misunderstanding. Irish dialect. =5 cents.=

=No entertainments sent on approval or exchanged.=




    New York      TULLAR-MEREDITH CO.      Chicago

POPULAR ENTERTAINMENTS


=THE RAG SOCIABLE.= A Quaint old fashioned entertainment which is
always sure to please. Libretto by Edith S. Tillotson. Music by various
Composers. The dialog is very spicy and interesting, and humor and
pathos are beautifully blended in the various musical selections. The
characters include Mrs. Winters and her two daughters Betsy and Maria,
Miss Jemima Rush, Mrs. Bassett, Mrs. Collins, Mrs. Salina Grey, the
Allen twins (elderly), Mrs. Martha Ann Hall, Miss Eliza Hall, Mrs. Jane
Tompkins and Amanda Tompkins. The list of characters may be extended
ad. lib. to meet local conditions.

A fine entertainment for a class of women or girls, Ladies’ Aid,
Christian Endeavor and Epworth League Societies, etc. Price, 25 cents
per copy.

[Illustration]


=LOVE FINDS THE WAY, or The Detective That Father Hired.= Music by
Chas. H. Gabriel. Words by Rev. Wm. Danforth, author of “The Old
District School,” etc. A highly amusing farcical song-skit, with four
characters: A Determined Young Lover, an Irate Father, a Daughter with
a Will of Her Own, and an Aiding and Abetting Mother—parts: tenor,
basso, soprano and alto.

This composition consists of singing and dialog for each part and will
serve to enliven any entertainment. The music is moderately easy,
melodious and should be available in practically all communities. This
work consists of some 12 pages in sheet music form. The story is as
follows: A father, who objects to his daughter having a beau, believing
that she is planning to elope with an unknown young man, advertises
for a detective to ferret the matter out. The young lover answers
the advertisement, and the father hires him to detect the culprit,
promising to pay him “anything within reason.” When the young lover’s
true identity is disclosed, he demands as his reward, for having
detected himself, the hand of the daughter. The irate father objects.
The daughter eventually convinces him that true love was the real
detective in the case, and the parental consent is given. Price, $1.50;
50 per cent discount.


=THE OLD DISTRICT SCHOOL.= A farce in two acts (new version). Book by
Wm. Danforth. Music arr. by Geo. F. Rosche. This is a burlesque on the
district school of 100 years ago. Ezekiel Simpkins, the teacher, is
the central character. His costume is a tight Prince Albert coat, with
brass buttons, or a worn and faded “claw-hammer” coat, colored vest cut
low; stock collar, with large black tie; trousers, “high-water,” with
a patch of other color on one knee; well-worn shoes. Bald gray wig and
“side” whiskers. The costumes of the pupils are in keeping with those
of the teacher. The characters all read their lines from the book, so
that there is very little to be memorized and for this reason this work
can be prepared in a very short time. Price, postpaid, 50 cents per
copy.


=THE CHAPERON.= A humorous Operetta in three Acts. Libretto by Wm.
Danforth. Music by Geo. F. Rosche. “The Chaperon” is a humorous
operetta designed for church choir and young people’s societies. It
will be found available in all communities in which seven young men and
seven young ladies who sing can be found. The music is bright, tuneful,
easy to learn and easy to remember. The dialogue is witty, clean,
wholesome and entertaining. Price, postpaid, 60 cents per copy.


=THE VISION OF HENSEL.= An evening with the old songs. The old songs of
childhood, youth, love, war and home. Libretto by Ellan N. Wood. There
is no friend like an old friend and after all there are no songs we
love quite so much as the old ones. This cantata furnishes a beautiful
medium for the introduction of the old songs which we all know and
love. There is just enough libretto to the work to form a continuous
chain of thought throughout, and we know of no cantata that will afford
such a pleasing entertainment at such a small expenditure of labor. The
book is well worth its price if only to secure this fine collection of
old home songs. Full of sentiment, humor and pathos and decidedly new
and fresh in construction. Price, 30 cents per copy, postpaid; $3.00
per dozen, not prepaid; add 3 cents per copy for postage.

[Illustration]


=THE SPINSTERS’ CLUB.= A humorous operetta in two acts. Libretto by
Harriet D. Castle. Music by Geo. F. Rosche. “The Spinsters’ Club” is
a humorous operetta designed for church choirs and young people’s
societies. It will be found available in all communities in which a
church choir is found. The music is bright, tuneful, and yet easy to
learn and memorize. The dialogue is witty, pleasing and entertaining.
Price, postpaid 60 cents per copy.

=A returnable sample copy of any of the above mailed on receipt of 3
cents for postage; to be returned postpaid or paid for in Thirty days.=

       *       *       *       *       *


ILLUSTRATED PANTOMIMED HYMNS


=NEARER MY GOD TO THEE.= Posed under the direction of Eleanor H. Denig.
This is a particularly fine production and lends itself admirably for
a twelve-minute addition to an evening’s entertainment in the church
or hall. The instructions are very clear so that this pantomime may be
prepared by anyone with ordinary talent or ability. The fourteen full
figure halftone illustrations will be found an excellent help.

The music is very complete. The regular hymn tune is printed for mixed
voices; also an original quartet for voices of women and an original
setting for voices of men and an original duet for soprano and alto
by J. S. Fearis, thus furnishing a variety of music found in no other
publication of this sort. Price, 40 cents postpaid. “Not sent on
examination.”


=IT CAME UPON THE MIDNIGHT CLEAR.= Posed under the direction of
Eleanor H. Denig. This pantomime will be particularly interesting
during the winter season for a twelve-minute addition to church or
other entertainments. The directions are very elaborate, enabling any
person to prepare the same successfully. The music is very complete,
consisting of a hymn tune for mixed voices; an original setting for
voices of both women and men: also a very fine duet soprano and alto;
the latter by Chas. H. Gabriel. Price, 40 cents per copy postpaid. “Not
sent on examination.”




    New York       TULLAR-MEREDITH CO.       Chicago

NEW PLAYS

By Elizabeth F. Guptill


=The School at Mud Hollow.= A burlesque in two parts. 8 Males and 19
Females. Time about 2 hours. Price 35 cents.

[Illustration]

PART I. In which is portrayed the difficulties encountered by
Miss Arabella Pinkham, who has come to “Mud Hollow” to assume the
responsible duties of “Teacher” in the school. In selecting “Mud
Hollow” she seeks a change from the city life she is accustomed to, and
finds plenty of it in the manners, customs and dialect of the pupils.
From start to finish there is nothing but fun.

PART II. Which represents the last day at the school, when the proud
parents are present to listen to the final examination of the class by
the Supervisor and enjoy the program which is rendered by the pupils.
Part II. offers an opportunity for about 60 minutes of the finest fun
possible.

“The School at Mud Hollow” may be given in one evening, but for those
who would prefer to make two evenings of it, or to give only one
part, we offer the same work announced below under the title of “_The
New Teacher at Mud Hollow School_” and “_The Last Day at Mud Hollow
School_” either of which can be given as a complete entertainment
without regard to the other one.

=The New Teacher at Mud Hollow School.= Being Part I. of THE SCHOOL AT
MUD HOLLOW. 6 Males and 14 Females. Time about 1 hour. Price 25 cents.

=The Last Day at Mud Hollow School.= Being Part II. of THE SCHOOL AT
MUD HOLLOW. 8 Males and 19 Females. Time about 1 hour. Price 25 cents.


=Santa’s Rescue=

[Illustration]

Two mysterious pieces of paper fall into the hands of the children,
one being found by the BOYS and one by the GIRLS. The meaning of the
inscription on each remains a mystery until it is discerned that by
placing the papers together they have the message that the “Old Witch”
of the North has captured “Santa” and holds him in an ice prison at
the North Pole. Of course there could be no “Merry Christmas” without
their “patron saint”, so guided by the “Fairy Godmother” they start for
the North Pole to rescue him. The “Old Witch” endeavors to block the
rescuers’ way by the assistance of “Old Zero” and the “Snow Fairies”
but when they learn that the snow drifts they are piling up are to aid
in keeping “Santa” from his usual Christmas activities they get the
“Sunbeam Fairies” to come to their aid and melt the snow, while they
bind with a frozen cord the “Old Witch,” who is found indulging in a
nap which she takes only once every hundred years. With the “Old Witch”
powerless and in their control the Rescue of Santa is an easy matter.

Tho’ belated somewhat by his enforced stay at the North Pole, the
children are glad to become his “aides” in spreading a “Merry
Christmas” through all the world. This is a very clever plot, well
worked out, and will make a decided hit for the Christmas season. 4
Boys and 5 Girls with any number of Fairies. Time about 1 hour. Price
25 cents.



FARCES

=Taking the Census.= Mr. Cole, the Census Taker, has a funny experience
in an attempt to gather the facts required by the government from Mrs.
Almira Johnson, a “cullud lady,” and her young son Alexander. Three
characters only. Time about 10 minutes. Price 10 cents.

[Illustration]

=Answering the Phone.= Mrs. Courtney and her daughter have a most
trying experience with Nora Flanagan, the new “hired girl,” who in
their absence attempts to carry out the instructions given with special
reference to “answering the phone.” The final situation in which Nora
makes a date with Miss Courtney’s “intended” is ridiculous in the
extreme. 3 females. Time about 15 minutes. Price 10 cents.

=The Twins and How They Entertained the New Minister.= They have a
delightful time telling family secrets to the “New Minister,” who has
called for the first time. They explain the necessity of seeing their
mother to find out from her if she is “In,” for so often she is “Out”
when she is “In” and “In” when she is “Out.” 2 Males and 1 Female. Time
about 15 minutes. Price 10 cents.

    =NO ENTERTAINMENTS SENT “ON EXAMINATION”=

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber’s Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. The text of the inside cover,
“Best Entertainments for Any Time,” was repeated on page seven of the
text. The first instance of this page was deleted from this version to
avoid unnecessary repetition.

Inside back cover, “particuarly” changed to “particularly”
(particularly interesting during)




