Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This book was produced from images made available by the
HathiTrust Digital Library.)






                              THE O. S. U.
                               NATURALIST

                              PUBLISHED BY
            THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY

                  ------------------------------------


                            EDITORIAL STAFF

            EDITOR-IN-CHIEF—JOHN H. SCHAFFNER, A. M., M. S.

         ASSOCIATE EDITORS:                  ADVISORY BOARD:
  _Zoology_—F. L. LANDACRE, B. Sc.  PROFESSOR W. A. KELLERMAN, Ph. D.
  _Botany_—F. J. TYLER, B. Sc.            Department of Botany.
  _Geology_—J. A. BOWNOCKER, B. Sc. PROFESSOR HERBERT OSBORN, M. Sc.
  _Archaeology_—W. C. MILLS, B. Sc.      Department of Zoology.
  _Ornithology_—R. F. GRIGGS.       PROFESSOR J. A. BOWNOCKER, D. Sc.
                                         Department of Geology.


------------------------------------------------------------------------


                    Volume 1 November, 1900 Number 1




------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             COLUMBUS, OHIO
                        _PRESS OF HANN & ADAIR_

------------------------------------------------------------------------




[Sidenote: _THE O. S. U. NATURALIST_] A journal devoted more especially
to the natural history of Ohio. The official organ of THE BIOLOGICAL
CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY. Published monthly during the academic
year, from November to June (8 numbers). Price 50 cents per year,
payable in advance. To foreign countries, 75 cents. Single copies 10
cents.

            JOHN H. SCHAFFNER, _Editor_.
            F. J. TYLER, _Subscriptions_.
            R. F. GRIGGS, _Advertising Agent_.

    _Address_

          THE O. S. U. NATURALIST, Ohio State University,

               COLUMBUS, OHIO.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                CONTENTS

  Announcement

  An Ohio Station for Ampelopsis Cordata
      _W. A. Kellerman_

  The Baum Prehistoric Village site
      _W. C. Mills_

  A Foliicolous Form of Sorghum Smut and Notes on Infection Experiments
      _W. A. Kellerman_

  A List of Hemiptera Collected in the Vicinity of Bellaire, O.
      _Herbert Osborn_

  Additions and Corrections to the “Odonata of Ohio.”
      _James S. Hine_

  Dragonflies Taken in a Week
      _R. C. Osburn and J. S. Hine_

  Additions to the Ohio Flora

  Collecting and Preserving Microscopic Plants

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                 _The_
                         _O. S. U. Naturalist_

                              PUBLISHED BY
            THE BIOLOGICAL CLUB OF THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

            Vol. 1.         NOVEMBER, 1900.          No. 1.

    ----------------------------------------------------------------




                             ANNOUNCEMENT.

In presenting THE O. S. U. NATURALIST to the public, a few words may not
be out of place as to the motives and purposes which were instrumental
in bringing it into existence. The Biological Club of Ohio State
University is composed of professors, instructors and students of the
several departments of natural history in the University. These
departments have been carrying on certain lines of work for some time,
and the more important and technical has been reported in various
publications. Much of the work, however, which is only of local
interest, but still of great value in the development of the natural
history of the state, has had no convenient avenue of publication. For
this reason it was thought advisable to begin a journal in a modest way
in which such material together with other articles might be made
available for immediate use.

The idea had been entertained for some time that such a course would be
desirable. Several members had expressed themselves in favor of a
journal, and Dr. Kellerman had for some years contemplated the
publication of a purely botanical paper which should be devoted largely
to the flora of the state. Finally during the spring of 1900 Mr. Tyler
and Mr. Griggs, students connected with the club, began to arouse
interest in the matter by advocating the founding of a bulletin which
should provide a suitable avenue of publication. By a motion of the
club, a committee to consider the matter was appointed, consisting of
the following members:

    Herbert Osborn,
    W. A. Kellerman,
    F. J. Tyler,
    John H. Schaffner,
    Max Morse,
    R. F. Griggs.

This committee finally agreed upon a plan, which was presented to the
club and adopted, with slight modifications, on the 7th of May, 1900.
The editors are elected annually by the club, and following is the staff
for the coming year:

Editor-in-Chief—John H. Schaffner, A. M., M. S.

Associate Editors—Zoölogy, F. L. Landacre, B. Sc; Botany, F. J. Tyler,
B. Sc.; Geology, J. A. Bownocker, D. Sc.; Archæology, W. C. Mills, B.
Sc.; Ornithology, R. F. Griggs.

Advisory Board—Professor W. A. Kellerman, Ph. D., Department of Botany;
Professor Herbert Osborn, M. Sc., Department of Zoölogy; Professor J. A.
Bownocker, D. Sc., Department of Geology.

THE NATURALIST, while aiming to be strictly scientific and technical in
character, will endeavor to be of especial assistance to the teachers
and amateur scientists of the state. It is believed that the kind of
work contemplated will be of great educational value.

While THE NATURALIST is to be devoted especially to the interests of the
state, other matter which may from time to time be offered, will not be
excluded.

In these days, when specialization is the tendency in all branches of
knowledge, we think there is still room for the old-fashioned naturalist
who was well versed in a number of sciences.

Whatever one’s career may be, we believe that every scientist, and for
that matter every person of education, should be a naturalist first and
cultivate a broad general sympathy with nature, and only after that has
he a right to become a specialist. No apology need therefore be made for
the broad field which THE NATURALIST is to cultivate, and we present it
to the public, earnestly soliciting the coöperation of university and
college professors, high school teachers, students, and amateurs in the
different branches of natural science; and asking that leniency of
judgment which such enterprises merit when begun under special
difficulties. Finally THE NATURALIST is not intended to be a
money-making institution, but it will be improved and enlarged as
rapidly as the income from subscriptions and other resources will
permit.

                                                                J. H. S.




                AN OHIO STATION FOR AMPELOPSIS CORDATA.
                            W. A. KELLERMAN.
                               (Plate 1.)

While collecting in Scioto County on the 8th of July, 1900, I was
fortunate enough to come across an indigenous specimen of Ampelopsis
cordata. [1]The station for the plant is on a hillside one mile east of
Portsmouth, Ohio. The character of the environment is indicated in
figure 3, Plate 1; the plant in question growing on the bank by the
roadside at a point immediately above the bicycle in the central part of
the picture. The photograph from which the half tone was made shows only
a portion of the high hills that border the Ohio river. The soil is clay
and not regarded as very fertile. It is generally the case perhaps that
this species grows in “swamps and along river banks,” as stated in the
manuals, but the ground here is high and dry.

Footnote 1:

  Since the MS. for this article was passed to the printer, the locality
  was again visited and several plants, some of large size, were found
  further up the hillside.

The published statements as to the distribution of Ampelopsis cordata
are not uniform. Riddell, in his synopsis of the Western Flora, says it
occurs in the Alleghany Mountains west to Arkansas. Torrey and Gray, in
the Flora of North America, Vol. 1, under the name of Vitis indivisa,
give its distribution as Southern States west to Louisiana and Arkansas.
Wood using the same name in his class-book, says Southern States to St.
Louis. In Gray’s Manual, last edition, the plant is given under the name
of Cissus ampelopsis with the statement that it occurs in Virginia to
Illinois and Southward. The occurrence as noted by Britton and Brown in
the Illustrated Flora, makes the species still more decidedly southern,
namely, southern Virginia to Florida, west to Illinois, Kansas and
Texas. Prof. Stanley Coulter, in a Catalogue of the Flowering Plants and
Ferns indigenous to Indiana, published in 1899 in the 24th Annual Report
of the Department of Geology and Natural Resources of Indiana, says this
species occurs “in the central and southern counties of Indiana in
swamps and moist woods.”

In the fifth edition of Gray’s Manual the range of this Ampelopsis
(under the name of Vitis indivisa) was given as “West Virginia, Ohio and
southward.” In answer to an inquiry as to what in the Gray Herbarium was
perhaps the basis for the reference to the Ohio distribution, Mr.
Merritt L. Fernald kindly wrote me as follows:—“I find in the herbarium
a specimen of Cissus ampelopsis marked ‘Ohio’. It is one of the old
Torrey and Gray specimens and no further data are given.”

Dr. Millspaugh lists this species as Cissus ampelopsis in the Flora of
West Virginia and adds on the authority of Mertz and Guttenberg that it
also occurs in Ohio, near Wheeling. Upon inquiry of Supt. Mertz, I learn
that his notes of work upwards of twenty years ago contain no mention of
this species at Wheeling, West Virginia, or at Bellaire, Ohio. He
further informs me that what was taken for this Ampelopsis at Bellaire
was probably Vitis cordifolia, three forms of which were found growing
on the islands of the Ohio River near Wheeling. Of these he adds in a
letter to the writer, “I think we probably decided that one was V.
indivisa; but I feel sure that it was not and you are probably the first
to find it in Ohio.”

It will be observed that the distribution as noted by Professor Stanley
Coulter extends its range still further northward than my Ohio station.
It is likely that its occurrence still further northward in Ohio may be
detected by assiduous collectors.

I wish to say a word concerning the ornamental character of this native
vine. The foliage is bright green and very handsome. A figure of a
single leaf is shown in Plate 1, figure 2. This is reduced from a
photograph taken with the leaf itself used as a negative. I have never
detected a fungous attack or insect depredation on the leaves. The small
dull-colored bluish fruits in loose panicles when abundant are somewhat
ornamental. The vine is a vigorous grower and clings firmly to supports.
Figure 4 shows a plant used for ornamental purposes growing on the south
side of the Botanical Building at the Ohio State University. A figure
from a still more vigorous specimen was shown by Mrs. Kellerman in
Vick’s Magazine, January, 1900. This was made from a photograph of a
specimen growing at the north porch of a residence in Columbus, Ohio.
The same has been reproduced by Dr. Halsted in Bulletin No. 144 of the
New Jersey Experiment Station. The species can be transplanted readily.
One of the plants just referred to was dug up in June in Linn County,
Kansas, and easily survived its rough treatment. Roots were taken from
the Portsmouth plant in July this year and they are now growing and
producing stems. We have repeatedly transplanted specimens that were
grown from roots and from cuttings in the green house and always with
success.

A word as to the synonymy should perhaps be given. The species was
described by Michaux in 1803 under the name of Ampelopsis cordata.
Persoon in 1805 proposed the name Cissus ampelopsis for the species. It
was unfortunate that he did not retain the specific name, cordata; for
there seems to have been no need of discarding that part of its name
even if the genus had been originally misapprehended. Had he followed
the most commendable usage of the modern systematists, he would have
published the name in this form: Cissus cordata (Mx.) Pers. In 1811
Wildenow published the name as Vitis indivisa and here as before
unnecessarily a new specific name was given. Many authors have regarded
the plant as a Vitis rather than an Ampelopsis or a Cissus. We rely,
however, on Dr. Britton’s authority and use the name Ampelopsis cordata,
relegating the other names to synonymy.


Illustration: _Plate_ 1: KELLERMAN ON AMPELOPSIS CORDATA


EXPLANATION OF PLATE 1.—Ampelopsis cordata. Figure 1: A herbarium
specimen of twigs in fruit, from a photograph. Figure 2: A single leaf
and tendril after a photograph direct from the same, reduced by the
engraver. Figure 3: View of the station for the indigenous specimen at
Portsmouth, Ohio; the Ampelopsis is in the center of the picture
immediately above the bicycle. Figure 4: View of a plant growing on the
south wall of the Botanical Building, Ohio State University; to the
right of the door a portion of a Japan Ivy is seen.




                   THE BAUM PREHISTORIC VILLAGE SITE.
                              W. C. MILLS.

The field work of the Ohio State Archæological and Historical Society
was completed August 18. The explorations were a continuance of last
year’s work at the Baum Prehistoric Village Site, which is situated in
Ross County, Ohio, just across the river from the small village of
Bourneville, and is located upon the first gravel terrace of the Paint
Creek Valley. The village site surrounds a large pyramidal mound which
was examined a number of years ago under the direction of the
Smithsonian Institution of Washington. A complete report of the
explorations is found in the 12th Annual Report of the Bureau of
Ethnology, 1890-91. At this time the village site was not explored but
it was known to exist, as the following extract from the 12th Annual
Report will show: “This mound is situated upon the edge of the first
general bottom of Paint Creek, which though protected by a huge levee is
annually inundated. In overflow times the smaller circle of the
adjoining enclosure is almost entirely submerged, and the summit of the
mound is the only land visible above a broad expanse of water. Around
the mound upon all sides, particularly to the east, are traces of former
Indian occupation. Numerous fragments of pottery similar in fabrication
and ornamental feature to those found in the mound bestrew the plowed
ground. These were intermingled with the valves of mussel shells, pitted
stones, shell disks, human bones, arrowheads, pieces of perforated stone
gorgets, and a large quantity of chipped flint.” Directly north of this
village site, about one mile distant is the noted hill top enclosure
known as Spruce Hill, which overlooks the valley of Paint Creek for many
miles north and south. The hill on which this enclosure is situated is
about 500 feet high, and is a long narrow spur projecting from the
tableland and extending to the south.

The wall of this enclosure is composed entirely of boulders and broken
pieces of sandstone which had been collected along the margin of the
summit of the hill. These sandstones are the result of disintegration of
the sandstone strata which is near the surface on the hill top. Directly
east from the village site, a little more than 1300 feet, is what is
known as the Baum works, which was surveyed by Squier & Davis in 1846.
They described this work as the best preserved, and possessing gateways
that are wider than those of any other earth-works found in this valley.
They also made a survey of the mound which is situated in this village
site and they described it as a large, square, truncated mound, with a
base of 120 feet and having a flat top, with an area 50 feet square. The
mound at that time being 15 feet high. They also say that quantities of
coarse broken pottery were found on and around the mound. Thus it will
be seen that the early investigators found pottery surrounding the mound
and later explorations by the Smithsonian Institution show that the
broken pieces of pottery found on the surface surrounding the mound were
very much like the pottery found in the mound and placed with the buried
dead therein.

The object of the investigations carried on by the Archæological and
Historical Society is to show the connection between the occupants of
the prehistoric village and those who built the mound. This has been
done by carefully comparing the contents of this village site with the
contents of the mound as reported by the Smithsonian Institution. So
far, all of the pottery and implements of bone, stone, and shell that
were buried in this mound, have been duplicated in great numbers from
the refuse heaps, burials, and ash pits found in the village. The
village entirely surrounds the mound, but on the east it is more
extensive and occupies upward of five acres of ground.

The work of examining the village site is very laborious. Every portion
or particle of the earth to a depth, on the average, of two and one-half
feet is carefully dug over with small hand trowels, and every particle
of bone, shell or stone is carefully removed and examined. The contents
of the ash pits are screened so that no implements or ornaments may be
lost. The whole village site is platted, laid off in sections thirty-six
feet square, which square is again laid off into sections four feet
square. In this way every find is carefully located upon the map. This
year the work was conducted east and north-east of the mound. Here the
post-molds of their little tepees were found in abundance. Their
fire-places usually were placed just outside of the tepees, and their
refuse pits near at hand, and near by we found the burials. A series of
photographs, showing the manner of burial and the close proximity of the
burials to the ash pits and tepees, were carefully made. At one time
seven skeletons were exposed within an area of fifteen feet square.
Within this space two ash pits were found and one row of the post-molds,
showing the relation of the little home to the burial ground. The manner
of burial is shown by the photographs taken of the seven skeletons
exposed at one time, showing that they had no definite manner of placing
the bodies, as some were buried at right angles to each other, some were
placed at full length, and lying upon the back, while others were placed
upon the side; in still other cases the body was evidently doubled up
and then buried. A great number of skeletons of babies were found in the
ash pits, showing that the already dug ash pit was the most convenient
grave for the little ones, who was then covered with ashes, consequently
the skeletons were perfectly preserved. With a great number of the adult
skeletons were found implements of bone, such as awls, hoes, celts,
arrow and spear points of stone, beads and ornaments of shell and bone;
but with the skeletons of children varying in age from four to twelve
years were found the greatest number of ornaments made of shell and
bone. In one instance a large gorget made from the marine univalve
Strombus gigas about two and one-half inches in diameter, was found upon
the skeleton of a child six years of age. In another more than two
hundred beads and ornaments of shell and bone were found upon the
skeleton of a child not over seven years of age. In another grave a
child not over four years of age had buried with it, what at one time
was no doubt, a necklace made of elk teeth, perforated for attachment.
In two instances the graves of children were carefully covered over with
slabs of slate. With those children whose graves were carefully covered
no implements or ornaments of any sort were placed. Of the sixty-three
skeletons found, not a single perfect piece of pottery was found buried
with them, differing greatly from the Madisonville Prehistoric Cemetery
near Cincinnati, for at the latter cemetery quantities of pottery in
their perfect state was found, buried with the skeletons. The pottery,
implements and ornaments at Madisonville can be readily dedicated from
the village at Paint Creek.

In the ash pits can be found specimens showing the masterpieces of art
wrought in stone, bone and shell, representing the civilization which at
one time inhabited this village. Of the bone implements, the needle,
made from the bones of the deer and elk is most beautiful in design, at
the same time showing the skill displayed in the manufacture of the
implements. Some of them are upward of nine inches in length. Of the
bone specimens perhaps the bead is the commonest. In some pits more than
two hundred have been taken out. In these ash pits were also found well
wrought specimens of aboriginal fish hooks, also specimens showing the
various stages of manufacture of this implement, which differs somewhat
from the manufacture of those found at Madisonville, a full account of
which appears in the 20th Annual Report of the Trustees of the Peabody
Museum of Harvard University, by Prof. F. W. Putnam, in which he fully
describes the manufacture of the fish hooks found in the prehistoric
village site. In no instance was an unfinished specimen found in the
Baum Village which would, in any way, show that a hole was first bored
through the bone and the fish hook then wrought from this hole as was
shown by Prof. Putnam; on the contrary a piece of bone was selected and
cut into shape representing a small tablet of bone two and one-half
inches long by from one-half to three-quarters of an inch broad, with
rounded edges at the ends. The center was then cut out by rubbing with a
stone on each side. So that two fish hooks were made instead of one from
the single piece of bone. A great many perfect scrapers made from the
metacarpal bone of the deer and elk were also found, while almost every
pit would contain from one to four broken halves of these scrapers.
Specimens were also procured showing the various stages in the
manufacture of this implement which resemble very much in every
particular those found at Madisonville, and also those found at the
village site at Fort Ancient.

The pottery fragments found in these ash pits resemble those found at
Madisonville, in the ornamentation by incised lines, implement
indentations arranged in figures, and handles ornamented with effigies
of birds and animals. Of the shell implements, perhaps the most common
is the shell hoe, which is made from the mussel shell _Unio plicatus_.

A great number of beads, from one-half to one inch in diameter, made
from mussel shells and perforated with from one to three holes, are
found. The large gorgets from two to two and one-half inches in diameter
are also found. These are invariably perforated with from one to three
holes, and are made from a shell foreign to the Paint Creek Valley.

Of the implements and ornaments made of stone, the flint arrow heads are
very common. These are mostly made from material brought from flint
ridge in Licking County. Grooved axes are also found, the type
prevailing is the one having the groove extend entirely around. The
perforated gorgets of slate are also found, but the most interesting of
the stone implements found in the pits are the perforated discoidals.
These are all small, varying in diameter from two to three inches, and
finely polished.

In the refuse heaps and ash pits were found the bones of the animals
used for food, charred corn, hickory nuts, walnuts, butter nuts, acorns,
hazel nuts, beans, seeds of the papaw, wild plum, etc. About thirty-five
per cent. of the bones taken from these pits were of the Virginia deer.
The bones of the black bear, raccoon, elk, ground-hog, wild-cat,
muskrat, squirrel, beaver, wild turkey, wild duck, wild goose, trumpeter
swan, great horn owl, barred owl, were found in abundance. But perhaps
the most interesting of the animal bones found were those of the Indian
dog. Skulls and parts of skeletons were taken from the pits in great
numbers. Professor F. W. Putnam, of Harvard University, who has been
making a study of the skulls of the dog taken from the mounds and burial
places of Florida, Georgia, South Carolina, Ohio, Kentucky, New York,
and from the great shell heaps in Maine, says that a distinct variety or
species of dog was distributed over North America in pre-Columbian
times, and by comparison he finds that the dog found in America is the
same variety of dog found in the ancient site of the Swiss Lake
dwellers, and also in the ancient tombs of Thebes in Egypt, and claims
that the variety of the pre-Columbian dog is apparently identical with
the pure breed Scotch collie of today, while Mr. F. A. Lucas, of the U.
S. National Museum, describes the dog found in the Baum Village as
resembling very much the bull terrier in size and proportion, and states
that the same species have been found in the village sites in Texas and
the old Puebloes.




              A FOLIICOLOUS FORM OF SORGHUM SMUT AND NOTES
                       ON INFECTION EXPERIMENTS.

                            W. A. KELLERMAN.
                               (Plate 2.)


On January 1st, 1900, several pots in the Botanical greenhouse of the
Ohio State University were planted to sorghum, Kaffir corn, maize,
sweet-corn and pop-corn. The seeds were previously moistened and mixed
with a large quantity of head-smut of sorghum taken from smutted sorghum
plants also from maize infected with the same fungus. This species was
named _Ustilago reiliana_ by Kühn in 1868 from specimens collected in
Egypt.

The plants developed rapidly and normally, though the stems were slender
and did not reach the normal height. The panicles appeared early and
only in a comparatively few cases showed infection.

In one case an anomalous specimen appeared, namely, a sweet corn plant
with the upper leaves as well as the panicle infected. This form
therefore differs from the type in being in part foliicolous and may be
designated as _Ustilago_ (_Cintractia_[2]) _reiliana_ forma _foliicola_
nov. for. Figures 1 and 2, Plate 2, show the appearance of the infected
plant, the one representing an earlier and the other a later stage of
the emergence of the smut mass.

Footnote 2:

  Mr. G. P. Clinton regards this fungus as a Cintractia rather than an
  Ustilago.

It may be remarked further that I have repeatedly tried seed inoculation
experiments, mostly in the greenhouse but also occasionally in the
field.

In the latter case in the summer of 1900, I obtained from a plot of many
hundred stalks including field-corn, sweet-corn, pop-corn, sorghum,
Kaffir corn and broom corn only three cases of smutted plants. These
were of sweet-corn, both the tassel and ear being affected. The previous
year about the same per cent. of successful inoculations were obtained.
But in the greenhouse the experiments have uniformly resulted in the
production of a considerable number of smutted stalks of sorghum and
occasionally an infected plant of maize. These have for the most part
been reported in print, the first account appearing in Bulletin No. 23,
Kansas Experiment Station, in the year 1891.

I have now growing in the botanical greenhouse three sets of sorghum
plants raised from seeds planted January 1, 1898, January 1, 1899, and
January 1, 1900. Only the plants have been retained which showed
successful inoculation experiments. They have been shifted to larger
pots from time to time, but the plants make only a stunted growth. The
new stalks that appear now and then are invariably affected, though
sometimes one of the panicles, either the one terminating the main stem
or one of the side branches may be free from visible smut. It is thus
evident that this species of smut is perennial where its host lives from
year to year. Figure 3 shows a photograph of one of the plants started
in the greenhouse in 1899, its first stem producing an infected panicle.
Figure 4 shows a plant grown in 1900, the first or central panicle not
exhibiting the smut, but later when panicles from the side branches
appeared, they were seen to be smutted.

It seems that another experimenter, whom I will quote, has succeeded
scarcely as well. Mr. G. P. Clinton, the assistant Botanist of the
Illinois Experiment Station, Urbana, Illinois, in Bulletin No. 57
(March, 1900) reports as follows: “Apparently from the experiments of
Kellerman, infection takes place through the germinating seed, though
the per cent. of infection he produced was rather small. In ’98 field
experiments were conducted here with a view of infecting the Orange
variety of sorghum with this smut. In one case the seed was mixed with
an abundance of spores and in others these spores were sprayed in water
or manure water on the young parts of the plants when about six inches
high. In none of the several hundred plants that matured was any sign of
the smut found. It is very likely that the variety used may have had
something to do with the negative results, as it was not the same from
which the smut was taken.”

The head-smut of sorghum is not to be confused with another species that
occurs on the same host. The one now referred to is a grain-smut, that
is, the panicle as a whole is not included, but the individual grains
become smutted. This species has been called _Ustilago sorghi_, but Mr.
Clinton regards it as a Cintractia, namely, _Cintractia sorghi-vulgaris_
(Tul.) Clint. It is more common than the former, occurring often on
sorghum and broom corn.

The head-smut of sorghum, _Ustilago_ or _Cintractia reiliana_, was first
found in this country by Prof. J. T. Willard at Manhattan, Kansas, in
1890, in a plot grown for purposes of chemical investigation. The same
year it was detected by Dr. Halsted in New Jersey. I found it in Ohio in
1897 and it is now reported for Illinois by Mr. Clinton. In all these
cases it occurred only on sorghum, but Prof. Hitchcock has reported it
as not uncommon on maize in fields about Manhattan, Kansas.


Illustration: _Plate_ 2: KELLERMAN ON SORGHUM SMUT.


EXPLANATION OF PLATE 2.—Ustilago or Cintractia reiliana. Figure 1: The
foliicolous form occurring on sweet-corn, the panicle not yet emerged,
but the smut on upper leaves in sight. Figure 2: Same as in Figure 1,
showing a later stage of maturity. Figure 3: An infected sorghum plant
in the greenhouse, photographed in 1899, the panicle smutted. Figure 4:
An infected sorghum plant, grown in the greenhouse in 1900, the central
panicle sound, the later (side) panicles smutted.




             A LIST OF HEMIPTERA COLLECTED IN THE VICINITY
                           OF BELLAIRE, OHIO.

                            HERBERT OSBORN.

The following record of species represents the collections of Hemiptera
made during four days (Aug. 28, Sept. 1, 1900) at points within five
miles of Bellaire, all on the Ohio side of the river. Wooded hillsides,
valleys, creek bottoms and shore and island of the river were worked
during a part of each day and as the list includes one hundred and
forty-nine species, it is probably fairly representative for the common
species of the season.


                               HOMOPTERA.

_Cicadidæ._ Cicada tibicen L. One specimen found dead.

_Membracidæ._ Entilia sinuata Fab., Publilia concava Say, Ceresa diceros
Say, Ceresa bubalus Fab., Thelia bimaculata Fab., Acutalis calva Say,
Vanduzea arcuata Say.

_Fulgoridæ._ Scolops sulcipes Say, Scolops sp., Ormenis pruinosa Say, O.
septentrionalis Fab., Amphiscepa bivittata Say, Bruchomorpha dorsata
Fh., B. oculata Newmn., Issus? sp. Pissonotus ater VanD., Stobera
tricarinata Say, Stobera sp., Liburnia campestris VanD., L. ornata Stal,
Liburnia sp.

_Cercopidæ._ Lepyronia 4-angularis Say, Clastoptera obtusa Say, C.
proteus Fh., C. xanthocephala Germ.

_Bythoscopidæ._ Macropsis apicalis O. & B., Agallia sanguinolenta Prov.,
A. 4-punctata Prov., A. constricta VanD., A. novella Say, Idiocerus
pallidus Fh., I. snowi G. & B., I. verticis Say.

_Tettigonidæ._ Aulacizes irrorata Fab., Tettigonia bifida Say, T.
tripunctata Fh., T. gothica Sign., T. hartii Wdw. (mss), Diedrocephala
coccinea Forst., D. mollipes Say, Helochara communis Fh., Gypona
octolineata Say.

_Jassidæ._ Xestocephalus pulicarius VanD., X. tessellatus VanD.,
Platymetopius acutus Say, P. frontalis VanD., Deltocephalus sayi Fh., D.
sylvestris O. & B., D. apicatus Osb., D. weedi VanD., D. obtectus O. &
B., D. inimicus Say, D. flavicosta Stal, D. nigrifrons Forbes,
Scaphoideus immistus Say, S. auronitens Prov., S. scalaris VanD.,
Athysanus curtisii Fh., A. (Limotettix) exitiosa Uhl., Athysanella
acuticauda Bak., Lonatura catalina O. & B., Eutettix seminudus Say,
Phlepsius irroratus Say, P. decorus O. & B., Thamnotettix clitellarius
Say, Chlorotettix unicolor Fh., C. galbanata VanD., Jassus olitorius
Say, Cicadula 6-notata Fall., C. punctifrons Fall., Gnathodus punctatus
Thunb., G. abdominalis VanD., Empoasca smaragdula Fall., E. obtusa
trifasciata Gill., E. mali LeB., Dicraneura flavipennis Fab., Typhlocyba
comes vitis Harr., T. comes basilaris Say, T. comes comes Say, T. c.
ziczac Walsh, T. obliqua Say, T. vulnerata Say, T. tricinta Fh., T,
trifascaita Say, T. querci bifasciata Gill., T. hartii Gill.

_Aphididæ._ Pemphigus populi transversus Riley, On Cottonwood.

_Aleyrodidæ._ Aleurodes sp. Abundant on Sycamore leaves.

_Coccidæ._ Chionaspis salicis Harr.


                              HETEROPTERA.

_Cydnidæ._ One specimen as yet undetermined.

_Pentatomidæ._ Podisus cynicus Say, Brochymena annulata Fab., Cosmopepla
carnifex Fab., Euschistus fissilis Uhl., E. tristigma Say, E.
variolarius P. Beauv., Trichopepla semivittata Say, Thyanta custator
Fab.

_Coreidæ._ Neides muticus Say, Jalysus spinosus Say, Corizus lateralis
Say, C. nigristernum Sign., C. bohemani Sign., (?) C. noveboracensis
Sign.

_Lygaeidæ._ Nysius thymi Wolff, N. angustatus Uhl., Orsillacis producta
Uhl., Ischnorhynchus didymus Zett., Blissus leucopterus Say, Cymus
angustatus Stal. Geocoris limbatus Stal, G. fuliginosus Say, Myodocha
serripes Oliv., Ligyrocoris sylvestris L., Ptochiomera nodosa Say,
Lygaeus kalmii Stal, L. turcicus Fab.

_Capsidæ._ Megalocoerea debilis Uh. (?), Miris affinis Reut.,
Compsocerocoris annulicornis Reut., Calocoris rapidus Say, Lygus
pratensis L., L. plagiatus Uhl., Poecyloscytus basalis Reut.,
Camptobrochis nebulosus Uhl., Eccritotarsus elegans Uhl., Hyaliodes
vitripennis Say. Episcopus ornatus Uh., Ilnacora stalii Reut.,
Pilophorus bifasciatus Fab, Malacocoris irroratus Say, Garganus
fusiformis Say, Halticus uhleri Giard, Styphrosoma stygica Say, Neoborus
laetus Uhl., Plagiognathus obscurus Uhl., Plagiognathus sp., Agalliastes
associatus, Uhl.

_Acanthiidæ_ Triphleps insidiosus Say.

_Tingitidæ._ Corythuca ciliata Say.

_Phymatidæ._ Phymata fasciata Gray.

_Nabidæ._ Coriscus ferus L.

_Reduviidæ._ Sinea diadema Fab., Acholla multispionosa DeG., Diplodus
luridus Stal.

_Hygrotrechidæ._ Hygrotrechus remigis Say, Stephania picta H. Schf.

_Saldidæ._ Salda interstitialis Say.

_Corisidæ._ Corisa alternata Say.

Of the above list nearly thirty have not been recorded for the state
hitherto and there are a few specimens which are as yet undetermined.




          ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS TO THE “ODONATA OF OHIO.”

                             JAMES S. HINE.

Since the publication of the Odonata of Ohio, there have been several
species of dragonflies added to the State list, and we have had reasons
to change our minds regarding the identity of two species at least.

Enallagma Fischeri, Kellicott, is a synonym of Agrion antennatum, Say,
consequently the species will henceforth be known as Enallagma
antennatum, Say.

Our Gomphus lividus, Selys, is Gomphus sordidus, Selys, and Gomphus
externus, Selys, is Gomphus crassus, Hagen.

The following species have been added:

1. Lestes eurinus, Say, taken June 3, 1900, by E. B. Williamson in
Portage County. Numbers of both males and females of the species were
taken on Cedar Point, at Sandusky, July 10 of the present year.

2. Progomphus obscurus, Ramb., first taken at Ironton, June 1, 1899, by
R. C. Osburn. The present year I took several specimens at Vinton, June
10th.

3. Gomphus abbreviatus, Hagen, (?) was taken at Loudonville, June 10,
1899, by J. B. Parker and R. C. Osburn. The species was common at the
same locality June 14, of the present year.

4. Neurocordulia obsoleta, Say, has been taken at Cincinnati by Chas.
Dury and his associates for three consecutive seasons.

5. Neurocordulia yamaskanensis, Prov., was procured on Rattlesnake
Island in Lake Erie, June 28, 1900, by Prof. Osborn.

6. Nasiæschna pentacantha, Rambur, was taken near Kent, Ohio, June 21,
1900. In company with R. C. Osburn we procured three pairs of this
species. Others were seen.




                      DRAGONFLIES TAKEN IN A WEEK.

                  RAYMOND C. OSBURN AND JAMES S. HINE.

During the week beginning June 17th, we collected insects and fishes in
the region of small lakes near Kent, Ohio. A list of the Odonata taken
during that week is interesting, as it shows the richness of the Odonat
fauna of north-eastern Ohio and also the number of species of this group
that may fly in a certain locality at the same time.

     1. Calopteryx maculata, Beauv.
     2. Calopteryx æquabilis, Say.
     3. Hetærina americana, Fabr.
     4. Lestes uncatus, Kirby.
     5. Lestes rectangularis, Say.
     6. Lestes vigilax, Hagen.
     7. Lestes inequalis, Walsh.
     8. Argia putrida, Hagen.
     9. Agria violacea, Hagen.
    10. Argia tibialis, Rambur.
    11. Argia apicalis, Say.
    12. Erythromma conditum, Hagen.
    13. Nehalennia posita, Hagen.
    14. Nehalennia irene, Hagen.
    15. Amphiagrion saucium, Burm.
    16. Enallagma traviatum, Selys.
    17. Enallagma civile, Hagen.
    18. Enallagma carunculatum, Morse.
    19. Enallagma hageni, Walsh.
    20. Enallagma geminatum, Kel.
    21. Enallagma exsulans, Hagen.
    22. Enallagma antennatum, Say.
    23. Enallagma signatum, Hagen.
    24. Enallagma pollutum, Hagen.
    25. Ischnura verticalis, Say.
    26. Ophiogomphus rupinsulensis, Walsh.
    27. Gomphus dilatatus, Rambur.
    28. Gomphus quadricolor, Walsh.
    29. Gomphus fraternus, Say.
    30. Gomphus furcifer, Hagen.
    31. Gomphus spicatus, Selys.
    32. Gomphus sordidus, Selys.
    33. Gomphus exilis, Selys.
    34. Dromogomphus spinosus, Selys.
    35. Anax junius, Drury.
    36. Basischna janata, Say.
    37. Epiæschna heros, Fab.
    38. Æschna verticalis, Hagen.
    39. Nasiæschna pentacantha, Rambur.
    40. Macromia illinoiensis, Walsh.
    41. Epicordulia princeps, Hagen.
    42. Tetragoneuria cynosura, Say.
    43. Tetragoneuria semiaqua, Burm.
    44. Tramea lacerata, Hagen.
    45. Libellula basalis, Say.
    46. Libellula pulchella, Drury.
    47. Libellula semifasciata, Burm.
    48. Libellula exusta, Say.
    49. Libellula incesta, Hagen.
    50. Plathemis trimaculata, DeGeer.
    51. Celithemis eponina, Drury.
    52. Celithemis elisa, Hagen.
    53. Celithemis fasciata, Kirby.
    54. Leucorhinia intacta, Hagen.
    55. Sympetrum rubicundulum, Say.
    56. Perithemis domitia, Drury.
    57. Mesothemis simplicicollis, Say.
    58. Pachydiplax longipennis, Burm.

Number 2 was taken for the second time in the State. The species was
common along the Cuyahoga River, where both males and females were found
resting on foliage near the water’s edge or flitting nervously from one
resting place to another.

Number 27 is one of our rarer Gomphids. Only one specimen of the species
was taken.

Both male and female of 30 were taken. This is the first time the female
of this species has been taken in Ohio.

Number 39 was taken for the first time in Ohio. Three pairs of this fine
species were taken.

Two years ago I took males of number 48 at Stewart’s Lake. The species
has not been taken in the State since until this year when we took both
males and females at the same lake.

Number 53 has been considered a very desirable species, but it seems
that it is a common form in the lake region near Kent. About thirty
specimens were procured.




                      ADDITIONS TO THE OHIO FLORA.

The Fourth State Catalogue of Ohio Plants published in April, 1899, by
Kellerman, contained 2025 species of Cormophytes. In the first Annual
Supplement, published April, 1900, 69 additions were made. The following
22 additional species therefore bring the total to 2116 plants growing
without cultivation in the state. The numbers correspond to the Fourth
State Catalogue so that those who desire can easily copy the additions
and bring their catalogue up to date.

212a Bouteloua hirsuta Lag. Hairy Mesquite-grass. Ohio State University
Campus, Columbus. F. J. Tyler.

212b Bouteloua oligostachya (Nutt.) Torr. Mesquite-grass. Ohio State
University Campus, Columbus. Alice Dufour.

258a Bromus asper Murr. Hairy Brome-grass (London, Mrs. K. D. Sharp,
Coll., E. Monroe, Highland Co., W. A. Kellerman, Coll.) Alice Dufour.

265b Bromus breviaristatus (Hook.) Buckl. Short-awned Chess. Ashtabula,
(W. A. Kellerman, Coll.) Alice Dufour.

472a Wolffia braziliensis Wedd. Brazil Wolffia. Sandusky Bay. Abundant
at times. R. F. Griggs.

538a Convallaria majalis L. Lily of the Valley. Abundantly escaped in
Cemetery, Worthington. R. F. Griggs.

619a Salix nigra x amygdaloides. A. D. Selby, 8th Report Academy of
Science, p. 22, and others.

629 Change S. fluviatilis Nutt, to S. interior Rowlee. Rowlee in Bull.
Torr. Bot. Club. 27: 247, 1900.

629a Salix interior var. wheeleri Rowlee. Cedar Point, W. A. Kellerman
and R. F. Grigs.

636a Salix sericea x cordata. Ashtabula. (W. A. Kellerman Coll.) R. F.
Griggs.

637a Salix peliolaris var. graciles. Toledo. (J. A. Sanford, Coll.
1879.) R. F. Griggs.

638a Salix candida x cordata. Castalia, Erie County. R. F. Griggs.

864a Berberis aquilifolium. Pursh. (Mahonia aquilifolium Nutt.) Seeding
in Cemetery, Worthington. R. F. Griggs.

898b Diplotaxus muralis (L.) DC. Diplotaxus. Cleveland, Ohio. Wm. Krebs.

963 Philadelphus inodorus L. Mt. Pleasant, Jefferson County. W. A.
Kellerman.

1039a Cratægus cordata (Mill.) Ait. Washington Thorn. Steubenville,
Ohio. H. N. Mertz.

1045a Cratægus multipes n. sp. (W. W. Ashe in Bulletin 175 N. C.
Experiment Station, August, 1900.) Ohio, E. E. Bogue, Coll.

1132a Dolichos lablab L. Hyacinth Bean. Escaped from cultivation in
several places in Columbus. Found growing on vacant lots, surrounded by
large weeds. John H. Schaffner.

1188a Rhus cotinus L. Escaped, Mt. Pleasant, Jefferson County. W. A.
Kellerman.

1219a Ampelopsis cordata Michx. Scioto County. Previously reported for
Ohio. W. A. Kellerman.

1255 Lechea minor L. Steubenville, Ohio. H. N. Mertz.

1487a Gilia coronopifolia Pers. Growing in a cemetery near Madison, Lake
County. Spreading slowly. F. J. Tyler.

1729 Euphorbia lathyris L. Pomeroy, Meigs County. W. A. Kellerman.

1919a Polymnia canadensis var. radiata Gray. Cedar Point. Very abundant.
R. F. Griggs.

1943a Helianthus maximiliani Schrad. Sandusky. A single plant along
railroad tracks. R. F. Griggs.




             COLLECTING AND PRESERVING MICROSCOPIC PLANTS.

Small plants like Desmids, Diatoms, etc., may be preserved in water, in
homeopathic vials, provided a drop of carbolic acid is added to each
bottle of material. In this way they will keep for a long time with very
little change of color and contents.

                                                                J. H. S.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                        _Ohio State University_


Six distinct and independent Colleges, each with a Dean and Faculty of
its own.

           THIRTY SEVEN DEPARTMENTS. AGRICULTURE, ARTS, LAW,
           THIRTY DISTINCT COURSES.  ENGINEERING, PHARMACY,
                                     VETERINARY MEDICINE.

Superior facilities for education in Applied Science. Short or special
courses for mature students not candidates for degrees.

 One hundred and twenty one instructors. Over thirteen hundred students.

                     FINEST GYMNASIUM IN THE WEST.

_For further information address the President,_

            DR. W. O. THOMPSON, STATE UNIVERSITY, COLUMBUS.

                             --------------

           Ohio Forest Trees Identified by Leaves and Fruit.

           By W. A. KELLERMAN, PH. D., Ohio State University.

A neat pamphlet for every one who wishes to learn our native forest
trees. Keys simple. Description plain. Can learn the names of the trees
easily.

Price reduced from 25 cents to 10 cents.

Also, =The Fourth State Catalogue of Ohio Plants.=

Bound copies at cost of binding, namely 20 cents.

  Gives list of scientific and common names; distribution by counties.

Teachers and others will also be interested in Prof. Kellerman’s
Phyto-theca or Herbarium Portfolio, _Practical Studies_ in Elementary
Botany, _Elementary Botany_ with Spring Flora, all published by Eldredge
& Bro., Philadelphia, to whom apply.

For information or copies of _Forest Trees_ and _Catalogue_ or names of
plant specimens of your region _address_

                                         W. A. KELLERMAN, COLUMBUS, OHIO

                             --------------

                       American Entomological Co.

                  1040 DE KALB AVENUE, BROOKLYN, N. Y.

Lepidoptera Price List No. 2.—_Price 5 cents_ (Refunded to Buyers)

                       ISSUED NOVEMBER 15th 1900.

Dealers of all kinds of _Entomological Supplies_

Manufacturers of the Original and Celebrated SCHMITT INSECT BOXES.

                  _Builders of INSECT CABINETS, ETC._

------------------------------------------------------------------------




The Twentieth Century Text Books of Biology.

          PLANT RELATIONS, 12mo, cloth                   $1.10
          PLANT STRUCTURES, 12mo, cloth                   1.20
          PLANT STUDIES, 12mo, cloth                      1.20
          PLANTS, 12mo, cloth                             1.80
          ANALYTICAL KEY TO PLANTS, 12mo, flexible cloth   .75

   All by JOHN MERLE COULTER, A. M., Ph. D., Head of Dept. of Botany,
                         University of Chicago.

    _They are already the preferred texts, and the reasons will be
    apparent on examination._




                 ANIMAL LIFE: A First Book of Zoology.

By DAVID S. JORDAN, M. S., M. D., Ph. D., LL. D., President of the
    Leland Stanford Junior University, and VERNON L. KELLOGG, M. S.,
    Professor in Leland Stanford Junior University. 12mo. Cloth, $1.20.
    _Now ready._

    _Not a book for learning the classification, anatomy, and
    nomenclature of animals, but to show how animals reached their
    present development, the effects of environment, their place in
    Nature, their relations to one another and to the human race.
    Designed for one-half year’s work in high schools. Send for sample
    pages._

                  ANIMAL FORMS: A Second Book of Zoology.

  By DAVID S. JORDAN, M. S., M. D., Ph. D., LL. D., and HAROLD HEATH,
    Ph. D., Professor in Leland Stanford Junior University. _Ready in
    February, 1901._

                             --------------

=D. APPLETON AND COMPANY, Publishers=, _New York_, _Chicago_, _London_.

                             --------------




                        RECENT SCIENTIFIC WORKS

    =In Astronomy=, Dr. Simon Newcomb’s new book, published October,
    1900; in =Physics=, the Johns Hopkins text of Professors Rowland and
    Ames; also in Physics for second and third year high school work,
    the text of Dr. Hoadley, of Swarthmore; in =Physiology=, the text by
    Drs. Macy and Norris, based on the Nervous System; also the =High
    School Physiology= indorsed by the W. C. T. U., written by Dr.
    Hewes, of Harvard University; in =Geology=, the =Revised “Compend”=
    of Dr. Le Conte, and the two standard works of Dana,—The =Manual for
    University Work=, and the =New Text Book=, revision and rewriting of
    Dr. Rice, for fourth year high school work; in =Chemistry=, the
    approved =Storer and Lindsay=, recommended for secondary schools by
    the leading colleges; in =Zoology=, the =Laboratory Manual= of Dr.
    Needham, of Cornell; and the Series “=Scientific Memoirs=” edited by
    Dr. Ames, of Johns Hopkins. Nine volumes ready.

              The publishers cordially invite correspondence.

    AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY, =CINCINNATI=

------------------------------------------------------------------------




    ● Transcriber’s Notes:
       ○ Missing or obscured punctuation was corrected.
       ○ Typographical errors were silently corrected.
       ○ Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation were made consistent only
         when a predominant form was found in this book.
       ○ Text that was in italics is enclosed by underscores
         (_italics_); text that was bold by “equal” signs (=bold=).




